FIRST CONTRIBUTION DETERMINED AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL OF BENIN UNDER THE PARIS AGREEMENT
RESUME EXECUTIF
Pursuant to paragraph 13 of decision 1 / CP.20 on the Lima call of December 2014, which reiterated the invitation to Parties to report their Nationally Determined Planned Contributions (INDCs) as a prelude to COP21, Benin submitted the INDC to the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in September 2015. This document could take the place of its first Nationally Determined Contribution (CDN) if it had not exercised, upon the deposit of its instrument of ratification of the Paris Agreement, on October 31, 2016, the option of to develop its NDC by updating its INDC, as provided for in paragraph 22 of Decision 1 / CP.21 adopting the Paris Agreement.
1. NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Located in West Africa in the Gulf of Guinea, between latitudes 6 ° 30 'and 12 ° 30'N and longitudes 1 ° and 3 ° 40'E, the Republic of Bénincouvre an area of 114 763 km 2. With an average annual population growth rate of 3.5%, its population is estimated at around 10,653,654 inhabitants for the year 2016. Two types of climate govern the country: the sub-equatorial climate in the southern region and the continental tropical climate in the northern region. From an economic point of view, Benin is a Least Developed Country (LDC) whose economy is based mainly on agriculture. Despite economic efforts, the average real growth rate (4.2% from 2006 to 2015) is lower than the growth rate of 7%, which is necessary to sustainably fight against poverty.
The political will of the Government of Benin to combat the climate change issue finds its place in its 2016-2021 Action Program (PAG) which is based on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the decisions of the Kyoto Accord. Paris. Climate change is therefore a concern of the Government of Benin, which develops actions on the basis of clearly defined objectives and orientations through state structures, local authorities, the private sector and civil society organizations.
2. ATTENUATION
2.1. Current greenhouse gas emissions and projected status quo status quo
Benin's total GHG emissions are about 14.1 mega tonnes CO2 equivalent (Mt ECO2 ), or about 1.5 tons E CO2 per capita in 2012, land use sector, allocation changes Land and Forestry (LULUCF) excluded. These emissions come from the energy sector (47.4%), agriculture (45.9%), waste (5.0%) and industrial processes (1.6%). Taking into account the LULUCF sector, the balance of emissions (14.9 Mt E-CO2 ) and removals (50.3 Mt CO2 ) of GHGs shows that Benin remains globally a GHG sink with a net absorption capacity. 35.4 Mt CO2in 2012. However, its capacity for carbon sequestration, or even CO2 absorption , at the level of its vegetation cover is decreasing (20.6% between 1995 and 2005 compared to 32.0% in 2012).
In terms of projection, in the context of the standstill scenario (without intervention), the overall emissions trend (excluding LULUCF) shows a growth rate of 172.8% over the period 2012-2030, Mt E-CO2 at 38.5 Mt E-CO 2. Total cumulative GHG emissions for this scenario over the 2021-2030 period are close to 306.1 Mt E-CO2 . They come from 66.3% of the energy sector and 27.4% from that of agriculture.
Benin plans to reduce overall cumulative greenhouse gas emissions (excluding the forestry sector) compared to the status quo scenario of about 49.49 Mt E-CO2 , a reduction of 16.17% over the period from 2021 to 2030. The share of national efforts is of the order of 3.63% and that of the conditional contribution is 12.55%. The implementation of these measures would contribute to reducing cumulative greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector compared to the status quo scenario of 23.35 Mt E CO2over the period from 2021 to 2030, ie 11.51% of which 9.53% conditional contribution and 1.98% unconditional contribution. Reduction efforts in the agriculture sector would avoid cumulative GHG emissions of about 26.1 Mt CO2 compared to the business-as-usual scenario, a 31.1% reduction over the period from 2021 to 2030, including 25.3% conditional contribution and 5.8% unconditional contribution.
In the LULUCF sector, the implementation of the measures could contribute to increasing Benin's cumulative sequestration capacity to 32 Mt E-CO2 compared to the scenario of maintaining the status quo in this sector in the 2021 period. -2030 of which 76.6% conditional contribution and 23.4% unconditional contribution, through the limitation of deforestation (23.9 Mt E-CO2 ) and the creation of forest plantations (8.1 Mt E CO2 ).
2.2. Objectives and actions for climate change mitigation
Based on existing strategies, plans and programs, the key sectoral objectives and climate change mitigation measures reported in Tables 3-5.
2.3. Strategies, Programs, Implementation Projects
The implementation of sectoral mitigation activities (agriculture, energy and forestry) under the NLC will build on existing strategies, programs and projects and future programs and projects.
3. ADAPTATION
Given its membership of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) groups, its environmental context and its development objectives, adaptation remains for the Republic of Benin priority in response to climate change even though it adheres unconditionally to the global effort, geared towards the mitigation strategy.
3.1. Vulnerability of Benin to climate change
In terms of current vulnerability, the major climatic hazards that impact livelihoods and livelihoods in the agriculture, water resources, coastal and forestry sectors are: drought, floods, late rains and violent, violent winds, excessive heat and rising sea levels. The manifestations of these climatic risks have generated numerous impacts over the past three decades , in this case the fall in agricultural yields, the disruption agricultural calendars, falling water levels in dams for drinking water supply, prolonging the low-water period, submerging banks, etc.
With regard to future vulnerability, the climatic risks to which the natural and human systems may be exposed fall within a scenario of persistence or increase in the risks currently observed and are a function of the sector considered. The potential impacts, according to the climate projections at time horizons 2025, 2050 and 2100, range from coastal flooding and saline water intrusion in the rivers and water tables to a decline in maize yields in some agro-ecological zones (AEZs in particular). ) by shifting flood periods in the Benin portion of the Niger basin.
3.2. Objectives of adaptation to climate change
On the basis of existing strategies, plans and programs, the key sectoral targets for climate change adaptation are defined for the time horizons 2020, 2025 , 2030 and shown in Table 7.
3.3. Strategies, Programs, Implementation Projects
The implementation of sectoral adaptation activities (agriculture, water resources, coastline and forestry) under the NLC will build on existing strategies, programs and projects and future programs and projects.
4. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CDN
Benin's NDC will be implemented under the auspices of the Ministry of the Environment, which acts as the National Focal Point of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change with the effective participation of all stakeholders, including Technical and Financial Partners, state and non-state actors with a focus on gender and social inclusion (sector ministries, local governments, private sector, civil society, etc.). Stakeholder involvement will be ensured through certain bodies including (i) the Steering Committee of the CDN which is the supreme body for decision-making and guidance, (ii) the National Coordination of the CDN which is the federating entity of all the actions and (iii) the sectoral implementation teams coming under the ministries covered by the measures retained in the CDN. The implementation of the projects and programs identified at the level of the various sectors covered by the CDN is the responsibility of the sectoral ministries concerned. The necessary guidance and facilities will be provided by the Ministry in charge of the environment to support sector ministries as needed in the preparation of funding search files at the level of the mechanisms put in place to assist LDCs.
5. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
The activities planned as part of the implementation of the Benin CDN require financial, technological and capacity-building resources.
With regard to technological resources, the focus will be on endogenous technologies and South-South and North-South transfer including the necessary know-how. The main technology transfer needs identified relate to the agriculture / forestry and energy sectors (Table 10).
Capacity building will consist of developing technical skills and improving institutional capacity.
The Republic of Benin, in order to achieve its greenhouse gas mitigation (GHG) ambitions, will need a global financial envelope of the order of US $ 6042.33 million, including US $ 2135.24 million as a contribution from the Government. Benin and 3907.09 million to be mobilized from technical and financial partners (TFPs) over the period from 2021 to 2030. The cost of implementing adaptation programs and projects is estimated at approximately $ 5,594.69 million. US dollar whose national contribution (unconditional share) is in the order of 1441.15 million US dollar while the conditional share (international support) is 4153.54 million US dollar.
In total, the financial resources to be mobilized for the implementation of mitigation and adaptation measures under this first CDN in Benin amount to approximately US $ 1,367.02 million, which should come from public funds, private sector and international support.
6. CONSTRAINTS RELATED TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
Successful implementation of the NDC could be constrained by a number of constraints, including: limited technical expertise, inadequate data and information quality, effective and timely mobilization of national resources, and external, the capacity of the public structures concerned to effectively manage large-scale programs, the effectiveness of the application of regulatory texts, the actual transfer of technologies and the success of research and development at national level.
I. NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
The Republic of Benin is located in West Africa in the Gulf of Guinea, between latitudes 6 ° 30 'and 12 ° 30'N and longitudes 1 ° and 3 ° 40'E. It covers an area of 114,763 km 2 . With an average annual population growth rate of 3.5%, its population is estimated at around 10,882,953 inhabitants in 2016 (INSAE, 2015).
Two types of climate govern the country: the sub-equatorial climate in the South and the continental tropical climate in the North. Year-round mean precipitation varies between 700 mm in the North and 1500 mm in the South, while air temperatures average around 27.2 ° C, with absolute maxima exceeding 45 ° C in the North (ASECNA, 2016).
Benin is one of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) whose economy is based mainly on agriculture, trade and transport with neighboring countries. Despite economic efforts, the average real growth rate (4.2% from 2006 to 2015) is lower than the growth rate of 7%, which is the minimum needed to fight poverty in the long term (MAP 2016-2021). This calls for many challenges to be addressed in various poverty reduction strategies (Ndoye et al., 2016).
Exogenous factors, including climate change, that may hinder the successful implementation of measures taken or envisaged to sustainably address poverty at the national level. Indeed, like other LDCs, Benin remains a country particularly vulnerable to climate variability and change, the consequences of which are felt at the national and local levels. For about two decades, the rainfall patterns characterizing the climates of Benin sometimes fluctuate very much in the middle or in the seasons. The main risks facing the country are drought, floods and late and severe rains. To these major risks is added the occurrence of climatic risks with a low geographical influence,
Awareness of the issues related to the issue of climate change has favored the development and adoption of several policies, strategies and response programs by Benin, including the National Agenda 21, the National Strategy for Sustainable Development, the Development Strategy for low carbon and climate resilient, the National Strategy for Strengthening Human Resources, Learning and Skills Development for Green, Low Emissions and Climate Resilient Development, and the National Action Program for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAPA). These documents generally aim to (i) integrate climate considerations into Benin's strategic sectoral operational plans, to be less carbon-intensive and more resilient to climate change for its sustainable development; and (ii) to provide Benin with a sustainable human resource base to address climate change. Other initiatives are currently underway, including the development of the national adaptation plan and the national policy for combating climate change.
The political will of the Government of Benin to meet the challenges of climate change is reflected in its 2016-2021 Action Program (PAG). This program is based in particular on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the decisions of the Paris Agreement. It provides for actions and reforms to "relaunch in a sustainable manner the economic and social development of Benin" including the development and implementation of adaptation measures, mitigation and disaster management through the continued implementation of implementation ofPANA, support for the development of renewable energies, initiatives for the protection of forests, reforestation and greening at the municipal level, the fight against coastal erosion, a strategy for climate-smart agriculture,
The urgency of the issue of climate change requires a comprehensive approach to response particularly by the Ministry of the Framework for Life and Sustainable Development (MCVDD). The main structures involved in the fight against climate change in this Ministry are the General Directorate Environment and Climate (DGEC), the National Fund for Environment and Climate (FNEC) and the Benin Agency for Environment and Climate (ABEC). The mission of the DGEC is to develop and ensure the implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the State's policies and strategies for managing the effects of climate change and promoting the green economy. Climate change issues are managed by the MCVDD in partnership with other sectoral ministries, local authorities, the private sector and civil society organizations with the support of the Technical and Financial Partners. These structures are involved individually or collectively through committees including the National Committee on Climate Change (CNCC), the Economic Modeling of Climate Impacts and Climate Change Integration in the General Budget of the State (CMEICB) , the national GHG inventory system, etc. The implementation of the system of measurement, notification and verification at the national level is under way through the Drafting of the First Biennial Report Update. These structures are involved individually or collectively through committees including the National Committee on Climate Change (CNCC), the Economic Modeling of Climate Impacts and Climate Change Integration in the General Budget of the State (CMEICB) , the national GHG inventory system, etc. The implementation of the system of measurement, notification and verification at the national level is under way through the Drafting of the First Biennial Report Update. These structures are involved individually or collectively through committees including the National Committee on Climate Change (CNCC), the Economic Modeling of Climate Impacts and Climate Change Integration in the General Budget of the State (CMEICB) , the national GHG inventory system, etc. The implementation of the system of measurement, notification and verification at the national level is underway through the Drafting of the First Biennial Report Refreshed.
II.ATTENUATION
2.1. Current greenhouse gas emissions and projections in case of maintaining the status quo
The data on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are based on the results available in June 2017 of the GHG inventory studies carried out as part of the project for the development of the Third National Communication (TCN).

Greenhouse gas emissions at the national level

Benin's total GHG emissions are about 14.1 mega tonnes CO2 -equivalent (Mt E-CO2 ), or about 1.5 tons E-CO2 per capita in 2012, land use sector, changes of Land Use and Forestry (LULUCF) excluded. These emissions come from the energy sector (47.4%), agriculture (45.9%), waste (5.0%) and industrial processes (1.6%).
Taking into account the LULUCF sector, the balance of emissions (14.9 Mt E-CO2 ) and removals (50.3 Mt CO2 ) of GHG shows that Benin is globally a GHG sink with an absorption capacity. net of 35.4 Mt CO2 in 2012, that is, its GHG emissions are largely offset by the uptake of CO2 in its forest cover. Although Benin remains a sink, its carbon sequestration capacity is decreasing, from (52.0) Mt E-CO2 in 1995 to (41.3) Mt E-CO2 in 2005, a decrease of 20 , 6%, and at (35.4) Mt E-CO2 in 2012, a decrease of 32.0%.

Projection of greenhouse gas emissions if the status quo is maintained

If the status quo is maintained, the overall emissions trend (excluding LULUCF) shows a growth rate of 172.8% over the 2012-2030 period, ranging from 14.1 Mt E-CO2 to 38.5 Mt. E-CO2 (Figure 1). Total cumulative GHG emissions without any intervention over the 2021-2030 period are approximately 306.1 Mt E-CO2 (excluding LULUCF). They come from 66.3% of the energy sector and 27.4% from that of agriculture.

Figure 1: Overall Emissions and Emissions Trend in the Agriculture and Energy Sector (1995-2030) - Business as Usual Scenario.

Assumptions and methodological approaches used to forecast greenhouse gas emissions under a status quo (Table 1).

Table 1: Assumptions and Methodological Approaches Used to Predict GHG Emissions in the Maintenance of the Status Quo 



Methodology for the accounting of emissions for the year 2012 (reference year)
The 2012 GHG inventories were produced according to the revised 1996 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines, IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management. for national GHG inventories (GPG 2000) and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for the Energy, Agriculture, Waste and Industrial Processes sectors.


LULUCF sector emissions approach for the reference year.
IPCC Good Practice Guidance for the Land Use, Change of Assignment and Forestry (LULUCF) Sector (GPG 2003), 1996 IPCC Guidelines (GL 1996).


Emission projection methodology of the business as usual scenario (without any emission reduction measures)
Projection of emissions by sector of activity excluding UTCAF (2013-2030):
 
The methodology used for emission projections from 2013 links the volume of a country's GHG emissions to three factors: population (Pop), GDP per capita (GDP / Pop), and GDP. GHG emissions per unit of GDP (GHG / GDP) according to the equation below:
Volume de GES = Pop x (PIB/Pop) x (GES/PIB)
The basic data used are:

Sectorial GHG inventories for the period 1995 to 2012 (source Project TCN)
Population data and population projections: period 1995-2030
GDP data in 2007 constant price CFA francs: 2002 to 2012 period.

The results obtained were adjusted over the period 2019 to 2030 to take into account the emissions that would be generated by the program for strengthening the internal heat generation capacity estimated on the basis of GPG 2000 and GL 1996.
Global Emissions Projection (2013 to 2030) : Global Emissions are estimated from the sum of sectoral emissions excluding LULUCF.



Global warming potential (GWP)
GWP values provided by the IPCC in its fourth assessment report: 1 for CO2 , 25 for CH 4 and 298 for N 2 O.



2.2. Measures for nationally determined contributions to mitigation
The Republic of Benin is one of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and countries with low elevation coastal zones. Based on this consideration, Benin in its submission, presents a contribution to the mitigation of GHG based on measures contained in strategies, programs and projects for the period 2017-2030. This period includes the preparatory phase for the implementation of the NDC (2017 to 2020) and the NSC implementation period (2021 to 2030, GHG emission reduction accounting period). Numerous opportunities for GHG mitigation have been identified in agriculture, energy and LULUCF sectors for this purpose.

Measures for nationally determined contributions to mitigation

The overall national contribution to mitigation is presented in Table 2. The planned sectoral measures and their effects are presented in Tables 3, 4 and 5 and illustrated in Figures 2, 3 and 4.
Table 2: Overall contribution determined at national level



Period covered
2017-2030 (2017-2020: preparatory phase for the implementation of the NSC, 2021-2030: implementation of the NDC and accounting for GHG emission reductions)


Year of reference
2012


Type of contribution
Contribution based on measures contained in strategies, programs and projects that can contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions and based both on national resources (unconditional contribution) and on the support of the international community (conditional contribution).
 
The unconditional contribution includes public funds and private investments.




Scope and scope



GHG considered in the contribution
Carbon Dioxide (CO2 ), Methane (CH 4 ), Nitrous Oxide (N 2 O)


Sectors / sources covered by the contribution
-Energy (sources: residential sector and energy industries)
 
-Agriculture (agricultural soils, rice fields, burning of agricultural residues, prescribed burning of savannas).
-UTCATF (forest lands including natural forests and plantations).



Geographic coverage
All the national territory.


Expected overall reduction; emissions (all target sectors) compared to the business as usual scenario
The measures envisaged in the Energy and Agriculture sectors are likely to contribute to reducing cumulative GHG emissions (excluding LULUCF) by approximately 49.49 Mt E CO2 compared to the business-as-usual scenario, ie a reduction of 16, 17% over the period 2021-2030 (Figure 2) of which 12.55% conditional contribution and 3.62% unconditional contribution.
 
The implementation of planned measures in the LULUCF sector would contribute to increasing its cumulative sequestration capacity of 32 Mt E CO2 over the period 2021-2030, of which 76.6% conditional contribution, through the limitation of deforestation (23.9 Mt E CO2 ) and the creation of forest plantations (8.1 Mt E CO2 ).
Reducing the annual rate of deforestation would reduce cumulative emissions from the forestry sector by 110 Mt E-CO2 over the 2021-2030 period, of which 80% conditional contribution and 20% unconditional contribution.





Figure 2: Estimated Global GHG Emissions under the Status Quo Scenario and Intervention
Table 3: Planned measures and avoided emissions in the agriculture sector



Sub-sectoral objectives
Measures envisaged
Unconditional contribution
Contribution
 
conditional (additional)



Promote improved farming techniques in the context of crop production.
(1) Implementation of improved farming techniques over an area of 500,000 ha / year.
250 000 ha / an
250 000 ha / an


Promote soil fertility management techniques  in the context of crop production.
(2) Implementation of techniques for maintaining soil fertility over an area of 500,000 ha / year.
100 000 ha / an
400 000 ha / an



Promote hydro-agricultural developments.

(3) Development of 96,500 ha of agricultural land and construction of 180 water reservoirs.
48,250 ha of developed farmland and 90 water reservoirs built.
An additional 48,250 ha of developed agricultural land and 90 waterways built.


(4) Development and irrigation of 52,000 ha of rice plots with water control.
26,000 ha of irrigated and irrigated rice perimeters with water control.
An additional 26,000 ha of irrigated and irrigated rice perimeters with water control.


Emissions reduction for the agriculture sector.

Expected avoidance emissions (Figure 3): Efforts to improve technical routes to limit methane fermentation and nitrous oxide emissions from nitrification / denitrification in cropping systems would avoid the cumulative emissions of these systems. approximately 26.14 Mt E CO2 compared to the business as usual scenario, representing a reduction of 31.1% by 2030, including a 25.3% conditional contribution and a 5.8% contribution. unconditional.
The cumulative avoided emissions are distributed as follows: (1) Promotion of improved farming techniques 4.3% of which 2.1% conditional contribution; (2) Promotion of soil fertility management techniques 23.8% of which 19.1% conditional contribution; (3) Promotion of hydro-agricultural development 3.0% including 1.5% conditional contribution.





Figure 3: Estimated GHG emissions under the status quo scenario and in the case of agriculture intervention.
Table 4: Proposed measures and avoided emissions in the energy sector



Sub-sectoral objectives
Measures envisaged
Unconditional contribution
Conditional contribution



Develop the production of electric energy from natural gas and renewable energy sources.

(1) Establishment at Maria Gléta of two-fuel thermal power plants (fuel oil, natural gas) for electricity generation (totaling at least 500 MW by 2030)
X
 


(2) Construction of a floating natural gas regasification terminal in the Cotonou port (total capacity of the power plants to be supplied: 500 MW).
X (60% of the investment)
X (40% of the investment).


(3) Natural gas exploitation of the thermal capacity of installed production.
X (3% of natural gas capacity and 97% of oil if the deagasification terminal project is not completed)
X (the totality of the capacity if the regasification terminal project is realized)


(4) Develop renewable energies (construction of Adjarala 147 MW hydropower plants, Dogo bis 128 MW, installation of PV solar farms with a total capacity of 95 MWp, structuring of a 15 MW fuel biomass sector):
X (60% of the investment)
 
 

X (40% of the investment)


(5) Construction of a third power plant (development of the Vossa site, 60.2 MW)
X (60% of the investment)
 
 

X (40% of the investment)



Extend household access to electric lighting to replace kerosene lighting.

(6) Electrification of localities by connection to the network (in total 600 localities between 2021 and 2030).
X (Electrification of 300 localities)
X (Electrification of 300 additional localities)


(7) Promotion of the access of 424,000 households using kerosene for electricity lighting in the localities that will be connected to the networks of the Société Benoît d'Energie Electrique (SBEE)
Acquisition of 212,000 household connection kits
 
 

Acquisition of 212,000 additional household hook-up kits


Strengthen the actions of efficient consumption of electric energy in all sectors.
(8) Continue energy efficiency actions in all sectors: industries, tertiary, and households (implementation of standards, solar PV plants on the roofs of administrative buildings, promotion of the use of low-consumption electrical equipment). energy, promotion of solar street lightingPV etc.)
X
 


Promote low energy wood consuming technologies
(9) Promotion of the economic use of energy and energy through the access of 140,000 new households to improved stoves.
46,000 households
94,000 households


(10) Support for the organization and development of the market for improved efficient stoves
X
 


(11) Establishment of regulations and measures to promote a market for low-energy conditioners and refrigerators using non-CFC hydrocarbons.
X
 



Promote the partial substitution of wood fuel consumption by butane gas

(12) Promotion of the access of 275,000 new households to cooking equipment using domestic gas: by subsidizing the acquisition cost of small equipment of 6 Kg + burner up to 30%.
90,000 households
185,000 households


(13) Domestic gas consumption subsidy up to 25% of the cost of recharging
X
 



Address current gaps in the energy databases

(14) Conducting a survey on improved stove penetration rates, gas cooking equipment and energy consumption in households (whole country)
X
 


(15) performing tests to verify the performance of the various improved stoves distributed by different actors
X
 


(16) Conduct a survey at the national level to supplement the information available on the fleet of vehicles with data on daily fuel consumption for categories and different uses of vehicles.
X
 


Emissions reduction for the energy sector

Expected Emissions (Figure 4) The implementation of these measures will contribute to reducing cumulative GHG emissions in this sector compared to the status quo scenario of 23.35 Mt E CO2 over the 2021 to 2030 period, 11.51% of which 9.53% conditional contribution and 1.98% unconditional contribution. Cumulative avoided emissions break down as follows: (i) electricity production 7.80% of which 7.06% conditional contribution; (ii) electric lighting promotion in households 3.62% of which 2.42% conditional contribution; (iii) saving fuelwood by promoting improved stoves 0.084% of which 0.056% conditional contribution; (iv) partial substitution of charcoal by butane gas 0.001%.





Figure 4: GHG Emissions Estimate under the Business as Usual Scenario and in the Energy Sector
Table 5: Proposed measures and avoided emissions in the LULUCF sector



Sub-sectoral objectives
Measures envisaged
Unconditional contribution
Conditional contribution



Increase the carbon sequestration capacity of the country's forest ecosystems through the implementation of sustainable natural forest management and reinforcement of reforestation / planting efforts

(1) Protection and conservation of natural forests and existing plantations to reduce and maintain the rate of deforestation to 35,000 ha / year instead of 60,000 ha / year currently.
reduction of the deforestation rate by 5,000 ha / year.
further reduction of the deforestation rate by 20,000 ha / year.


(2) Implementation of a reforestation plan with the objective of creating 15,000 ha of forest plantation per year.
Creation of 5,000 ha of forest plantations per year.
Creation of 10,000 additional hectares of forest plantations per year.



Emissions reduction / enhancement of sinks for the LULUCF sector.


Expected emissions / removals compared to the status quo scenario
(i) Limitation of deforestation: Cumulative avoided emissions over the period 2021-2030 are estimated at 110 Mt E CO2 , of which 80.0% conditional contribution; (ii) Carbon sequestration: 32 Mt E CO2 during the period 2021-2030, of which 76.6% of conditional contribution, through the limitation of deforestation (23.9 Mt E CO2 ) and the creation of plantations (8.1 Mt E CO2 ).
Emissions avoided / removals break down as follows:
Unconditional Objectives for the LULUCF Sector:
- reduction of cumulative emissions due to the UTCAFT sector of 22 Mt E CO2 during the period 2021-2030 through the reduction of the annual deforestation rate of 5,000 ha / year.
- increased cumulative carbon sequestration of natural forests during the 2021-2030 period of 7.5 Mt CO2 compared to the status quo scenario by reducing the annual deforestation rate by 5,000 ha / year (4.8 Mt CO2 ) and the creation of 5,000 ha of forest plantations per year (2.7 Mt CO2 ).
Conditional Objectives for the LULUCF Sector:
- reduction of cumulative emissions due to the UTCAFT sector of 88 Mt E CO2 during the period 2021-2030 through the reduction of the annual deforestation rate of 20,000 ha / year.
- increased sequestration of natural forests during the 2021-2030 period by 24.5 Mt CO2 through the reduction of the annual deforestation rate of 20,000 ha / year (19.1 Mt CO2 ) and the creation of 10,000 ha of forest plantations per year (5.4 Mt CO2 ).





Assumptions and methodological approaches for the development of mitigation scenarios

The assumptions and methodological approaches for the development of mitigation scenarios are presented in Table 6.
Table 6: Assumptions and Methodological Approaches for the Development of Mitigation Scenarios



Scenario emission projection methodology with measures in the agriculture sector
Implementation of improved farming techniques for crop production: reduction of GHG emissions by 0.72 t E CO2 / ha / yr.
 
Implementation of soil fertility maintenance techniques for crop production: reduction of GHG emissions by 4 t CO2 / ha / year. Implementation of hydro-agricultural development: reduction of GHG emissions by 1.01 t CO2 / ha / year.
Management and irrigation of rice-irrigated perimeters with water control: reduction of CH 4 emissions by 8.5 t E CO2 / ha / year.



Projection methodology of scenario emissions with measures in the energy sector.
The expected avoided emissions based on the planned actions were determined from the activity data according to the IPCC technical guidelines including GPG 2000 and GL 1996 guidelines.


Scenario Projection Projection Methodology with Measures in the LULUCF Sector
Annual rate of total deforestation in natural forests: 60 000 ha; emissions linked to deforestation of natural forests: 120 t ECO2 / year; capacity for sequestration of natural tropical forests 4 t C / ha / year; carbon sequestration capacity of forest plantations 2 t C / ha / year; implementation of a reforestation plan with the objective of creating 15,000 ha of forest plantation per year; protection and conservation of natural forests that would reduce and maintain the rate of deforestation to 35 000 ha / year.


GHG Global Warming Potential (GWP)
GWP values provided by the IPCC in its fourth assessment report: 1 for CO2 , 25 for CH 4 and 298 for N 2 O.


Net contribution of international market-based mechanisms
No contribution from international credits.



III. AMBITION AND EQUITY
The objective of reducing cumulative emissions over the period 2021-2030 of 16.17% based on the measurements is fair in relation to Benin's low contribution to global emissions, its low level of development and its socio-economic fragility . The Republic of Benin is one of the least developed countries in the world whose GHG emissions are estimated at about 1.5 t CO2per capita and largely offset by carbon sequestration in its forest cover. Its economic performance remains weak and unstable with a critical financial situation, marked by a relatively high level of debt and an increase in the budget deficit. The average real growth rate (4.2% from 2006 to 2015) is lower than the growth rate of 7%, which is the minimum necessary to sustainably combat poverty. The country depends on the outside for its supply of commercial energies (petroleum products and electricity).
The commitment of Benin is ambitious given that its reduction targets relate to the key sectors for economic development especially in the energy and agriculture and whose emissions cover 93% of the country's total emissions. Benin's aspiration to economic development and the growth of its population would induce a trend growth in its energy needs. As a result, GHG emissions from the agriculture and energy sectors are expected to increase steadily. The challenge will therefore be to promote low-carbon development.
IV. ADAPTATION
4.1. Vulnerability of Benin to climate change
In terms of current vulnerability, the major climate risks that impact livelihoods and livelihoods in the agriculture, water resources, coastal and forestry sectors are drought, floods, late rains and violent winds, excessive heat, and rising sea level.
The above-mentioned manifestations of climate risks have generated numerous impacts over the last three decades, in this case the fall in agricultural yields, the disruption of agricultural calendars, the drop in water levels in dams with water supply. drinking water, prolonging the low water period, submerging the banks, etc.
With regard to future vulnerability, the climatic risks to which the natural and human systems may be exposed fall within a scenario of persistence or increase in the risks currently observed and are a function of the sector considered. The potential impacts, according to the climate projections at time horizons 2025, 2050 and 2100, range from coastal flooding and saline water intrusion in the rivers and water tables to a decline in maize yields in some agro-ecological zones (AEZs in particular). ) by shifting flood periods in the Benin portion of the Niger basin.
4.2. Objectives of adaptation to climate change
On the basis of existing strategies, plans and programs, the key sectoral targets for climate change adaptation are defined for the time horizons 2020, 2025 , 2030 and shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Sector Objectives for Adaptation to Climate Change



sectors
Main goals of adaptation


All sectors
Horizon 2020/2030
 

Mastering vulnerability assessment tools and decision support tools for integrating climate change adaptation into the planning and management instruments of national and regional institutions.
Strengthen the ability to adapt to climate change in all socio-economic sectors (employment generation, income generation, etc.).
Mobilize the financial resources needed to finance adaptation to climate change.




Agriculture
Horizon 2020
 

Ensure the diversification and promotion of high value-added agricultural value chains, as well as the modernization of resilient agricultural infrastructure in the context of climate change;
Promote appropriate resilient and climate-resilient agricultural production systems for food and nutrition security (Climate Smart Agriculture);
Define new agricultural calendars adapted to a changing climate.

Horizon 2025
Improve the performance of Beninese agriculture, to enable it to ensure sustainable food and nutritional sovereignty, to contribute to the economic and social development of Benin's men and women and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) including SDGs 1, 2, 12, and 13.



Water resources
Horizon 2020
 

Ensure universal access to drinking water for the entire population of Benin;
Strengthen the availability of water in deprived areas to adapt populations to climate change;
Promote the water economy in the various uses.

Horizon 2030

Reduce the vulnerability of natural and human systems to water stress, floods and degradation of water quality;
Reinforce knowledge on the climate system and tools for generating climate and hydrological information and forecasting climatic hazards;
Promote the control and good governance of water.




Forestry
Horizon 2020
 

Promote intensive reforestation with incentives throughout the national territory;
Promote the sustainable management of state and communal forests;
Adapt the legislative and regulatory framework of the forest sector to the context of climate change;
Update the national forest inventory.

Horizon 2030

Reduce the vulnerability of communities to the degradation of forest ecosystems.
Promote agroforestry.
Develop mangrove ecosystems (forest formations characteristic of the coastline).




Littoral
Horizon 2020
 

Ensure the protection of the coastline against the risk of sea level rise that may exacerbate the phenomenon of coastal erosion;
Sanitize the banks of lakes and lagoons in the coastal environment.

Horizon 2030

Reduce the vulnerability of human settlements and coastal resources to sea level rise;
Ensure ongoing protection of marine and lagoon ecosystems.





V. STRATEGIES, PROGRAMS, PROJECTS AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
5.1. Implementation of sectoral activities 
The implementation of the sectoral activities foreseen in the NSC will build on existing and future strategies, programs, projects (Tables 8, 9, 10 and 11) .Therefore, the relevant sectoral structures are committed to taking them into account in design of future programs and projects.
It should be noted that some of the mitigation projects listed in Table 8 have co-benefits with adaptation and vice versa.
Table 8: Strategies, Programs and Projects for Preparing and Implementing CDN for Mitigation in the Agriculture Sector



Strategies, Programs and Projects
Actions enabling the preparation and implementation of the CDN



(1) Government Action Program 2016-2021



Support Program for Rural Economic Growth
Development of 405 hectares of lowlands for rice production and market gardening.


Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project in the Ouémé Valley (PAIA-VO)
Rehabilitation of hydro-agricultural development (i) 1,000 ha of irrigated perimeter development with total water control, (ii) 3,500 ha of lowlands including about 2,800 ha of flood plain floodplain and 700 ha of lowland - rice fields made to the company, (iii) 300 ha of vegetable gardens for women.


Food Production Support Project in Alibori, Borgou and the Hills (PAPVIRE-ABC)


Realization of hydro-agricultural development: rehabilitation of seven agro-pastoral dams (600 000 m3) and development of 1927 ha of irrigated perimeters.
Development of agricultural value chains and resilience (improvement of farm productivity and technological innovations, capacity building of stakeholders, development of agricultural value chains).




Project of Support to the Development of Market gardening (PADMAR)
Improvement of productivity and production (development of resilient market gardening perimeters on 2100 ha, access to improved technologies and techniques).


Program of Improvement of the Farm Productivity of Small Farmers (PAPAPE)
Increasing the productivity of small-scale rainfed and irrigated agricultural production systems (popularization of integrated soil fertility management technologies, restoration of soil health and fertility).


Irrigated Perimeters Project in Rural Areas (PDPIM)
Realization of hydro-agricultural development: development of 1000 ha of lowlands and 300 ha of small irrigated perimeters, rehabilitation of 200 ha of degraded agricultural land, construction of four (04) reservoirs.


Hydro-Agricultural Development Project for the Lower Mono River Valley (PAHV-MONO)
Realization of the development works of a pilot area of 500 ha in the Mono Valley.


(2) Project '' Supporting the Transition to Agriculture and Food Systems of Climate-Smart Agriculture '' (AIC)


Sustainable intensification of productivity and increased farm income;
Reduction and / or elimination of GHG emissions;
Creating a supportive political and financial environment that provides farmers with knowledge and access to resources and services for the transition to sustainable, productive, resilient and economically viable production systems.





(3) Strategic Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector



Improving productivity and production of plant products in priority agricultural sectors
At least a 50 per cent increase in current levels of agricultural productivity by 2025 (improved access to professional knowledge and technological innovations for men and women, promotion of irrigation schemes).


Building resilience to climate change and improving the food and nutrition security of vulnerable populations


Agricultural innovations for resilience to and mitigation of climate change (promotion of climate-smart agriculture), extension and support to implementation of GHG-limiting production systems);
Sustainable management of land and aquatic ecosystems.





(4) Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Development Strategy



Strengthening the resilience of communities and agricultural value chains


Acquisition of adapted irrigation systems;
Development of a national plan for land tenure security




Construction of multiple purpose dams


Construction of three large multipurpose dams on the main Ouémé river with integrated and effective watershed management plans;
Farmland management
Farmland restoration




(5) Project to strengthen the resilience of populations and vulnerable ecosystems of the Ouémé catchment basin to climate change through the AIC and the sustainable management of land and water resources.


Popularizing Agricultural Innovations for Climate Change Resilience and Mitigation (Promoting AIC)
Popularization and support for the implementation of production systems limiting GHG emissions
Promotion of sustainable management of land and aquatic ecosystems
Watershed management of Ouémé




(6) Integrated program of adaptation to climate change through the development of agriculture, river transport, tourism, in the Niger Valley in Benin
Development of agricultural and pastoral systems (construction of five (05) multi-purpose dams with development of 500 ha of irrigated perimeter downstream, rehabilitation of seven (07) hydro-agricultural dams, development 200 ha of lowlands with partial control of water, development of 500 ha of reclamation perimeters, realization of four (04) thresholds for spreading flood waters for flood recession areas).



(7) Program to reinforce past and ongoing actions in the field of improved farming techniques, soil fertility management techniques and hydro-agricultural development (2021-2030). (Program to be fully developed during the preparatory phase of NDC implementation).




Table 9: Strategies, Programs and Projects for the Preparation and Implementation of CDN for Mitigation in the Energy Sector



Policies, Strategies, Programs and Projects
Actions enabling the preparation and implementation of the CDN



(1) GOVERNMENT A CTION P ROGRAMME (2016-2021)



Project "Developing Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency"


Construction of Adjarala hydroelectric plant, 147 MW
Construction of the 128 MW Dogo -bis hydroelectric power station
Construction of the 60.2 MW Vossa hydroelectric power station
Installation of solar photovoltaic farms: total capacity 95 MW including 45 MW are taken into account by the MCA project.
Structuring of the biomass fuel sector: use of agricultural waste (potential of 15 MW)
Development of photovoltaic public lighting
Promotion of access of households in remote areas to PV solar kits




Project "Control of energy consumption"


Establishment of binding standards for reducing energy consumption
Installation on the main administrative buildings of solar PV plants with storage; replacement air conditioning
Public lighting: substitution of energy-consuming bulbs by low-consumption LEDs; street lighting by solar streetlight
Energy efficiency in households





Electrification projects of urban and rural localities



Construction project of the Kandi-Banikoara HTA line
Project to strengthen and extend electricity networks
Urgent realization project of electrification works of 17 rural localities by connection to the conventional network of the SBEE
Proposed restructuring and extension of the SBEE networks in the municipality of Abomey-Calavi and the Atlantic Department







Action program for the electrification of rural localities (projects in preparation: Electrification of 600 localities by solar photovoltaic system): Program in preparation at the Beninese Rural Electrification and Energy Control Agency.


 



Benin Program for the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA II)



Electricity generation project (i) Photovoltaic production activity by supporting the installation of four solar power plants, total capacity 45 MW;


(ii) rehabilitation activity of the Yeripao hydroelectric power station and its extension from 505 KW to 1 MW).

Electrical Distribution Project
Off-grid electricity access project.





(2) Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Development Strategy (Support for Energy Transition)




(3) Program of development of the capacities of production and extension of the access to electricity (2021-2030)



Construction projects of other thermal power plants
Construction of new oil / gas thermal power plants to bring the total installed capacity to at least 500 MW in 2030.


Project to build a third hydroelectric power station
Vossa Power Plants (60.2 MW)


Electrification projects of urban and rural localities


Continuation of projects to strengthen and expand SBEE's distribution networks in urban centers
Continuation of projects for the electrification of localities by connection to the SBEE network (600 localities between 2021 and 2030)
Continuation of off-grid electrification projects




Wood energy substitution project with butane gas and other energy sources in Benin


Promotion of the access of 275,000 new households to small gas cooking equipment (6kg tank + burner).





(4) Program for strengthening energy efficiency actions (2021-2030) (Program to be developed during the preparatory phase of the implementation of the CDN)





Promotion of household access to economic households using charcoal.
Promotion of the partial substitution of charcoal consumptions by butane gas.
Support for the organization and development of internal markets for the production and marketing of efficient cooking equipment (improved stoves using wood energy, butane gas cooking equipment).
Establishment of standards, implementation of regulations, support for the organization and development of a market for low-energy electrical equipment (lamps, air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers) and other electrical equipment.
Establishment of the obligation to take into account energy efficiency in public orders for electrical equipment and in the construction of public buildings (definition of specific specifications, interministerial order, etc.).
Generalization of installation actions in public administration buildings of automatic lighting and air-conditioning shut-off devices in the absence of office users.
Development of information and awareness campaigns on the benefits of energy savings and the performance of energy equipment in order to encourage changes in behavior.
Development / extension of actions to promote public lighting with LEDs or solar street lights.
Implementation of a program to support the improvement of energy efficiency in the industrial and tertiary sector.





Table 10: Strategies, Programs and Projects for the Preparation and Implementation of the CDN for Mitigation in the Forestry Sector



Policies, Strategies, Programs and Projects
Actions enabling the preparation and implementation of the CDN



(1) Government Action Program 2016-2021



Intensive reforestation program of the national territory by incentive measures


Development of the national strategy of intensive reforestation;
Achievement, maintenance and silvicultural monitoring of 20,000 ha of plantations and / or enrichment in classified forests and reforestation perimeters;
Implementation, maintenance and silvicultural monitoring of 800 ha of private, communal plantations
Achievement, maintenance and silvicultural monitoring of 700,000 linear meters of alignment plantations in urban and peri-urban areas
Realization of 300 green spaces in cities
Development and implementation of simplified management plans for forest plantations;
Implementation of a forest protection and protection system against bush fires and transhumance.




PAGEFCOM 2: Support Project for the Management of Communal Forests, phase 2


Promotion of non-timber forest products;
Development of the blue economy in forests;
Support for economic alternatives to the forest;
Improvement of forest cover.




Management Program for Forests and Terroirs Riverains, additional phase


Financing of alternative income-generating activities;
Protection and monitoring of old plantations;
Management of state plantations.




Strengthening the resilience of the energy sector to the impacts of climate change in Benin (PANA Energie)
Introduction of sustainable land and forest management practices to enhance the resilience of woodfuel production areas.


(2) Promotion of sustainable production of biomass electricity in Benin.
Adoption of best practices for land use, sustainable forest management (sustainable management of forests and land through restoration of land and forest plantations on 3000 ha, and the establishment of 2000 ha of plantations to provide biomass , improvement of agricultural techniques on more than 9000 ha through the adoption of the best practices of land use).


(3) Integrated program of adaptation to climate change through the development of agriculture, river transport, tourism, in the Niger Valley in Benin
Sustainable management of agro forestry and pastoral resources (2000 ha of improved fallow and agroforestry, 4000 ha of participatory sylvo-pastoral plantations in classified forests)



(4) Low Carbon and Climate Resilient Development Strategy (2016-2025): enhancement of carbon sinks and reduction of emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.



Strengthening carbon sinks and reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.


Implementation of large-scale afforestation programs
Establishment of the different components of the REDD + program
Development and implementation of sustainable management plans for forest ecosystems





(5) National Wildland Fire Management Strategy in Benin



Improvement of the management of the controlled management of wildfires


Implementation in forest policy (option of controlled management of wildfires)
Development of guidelines and plans for the controlled management of appropriate wildland fires.
Regulation of the use of fires in natural areas to be conserved, agricultural areas, grazing areas, forest areas, etc ... defined in the Master Planning Schemes of the Communes (SDAC)
Development of cross-border and international partnerships to assist in the management of major fires.





(6) Integrated Strategies for Promoting Private Woody Energy Plantations in Benin




Space Agenda of Benin



Ensure sustainable management of forest resources


Design and implementation of participatory development plans;
Restoration of degraded forest massifs;
Establishment of a monitoring and protection system for forest areas with modern tools;
Promotion of sustainable development of timber and wood energy
Sustainability of Conservation and Protection Initiatives
Design and implementation of a development program for agricultural areas related to the preservation of natural areas





(7) Strengthening Actions Program for the Protection and Conservation of Natural Forests and Plantations (2021-2030). (Program to be fully developed during the preparatory phase of NDC implementation)




Table 11: Sectoral Strategies for Implementing Adaptation Objectives



sectors
Sectoral Strategies for Implementing Adaptation Objectives


All sectors


National Implementation Strategy for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SNMO)
National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change (NAP)
National Development Plan (under development at MPD)
Government Action Program (PAG)
Strategy for Strengthening Human Resources, Learning and Skills Development to Address Climate Change




Agriculture


Strategic Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector (2017-2025)
National Strategy for the Provision of Effective and Efficient Agro-Meteorological Services for the Beneficiaries of the Agricultural Sector
Training strategy for farmers, pastoralists and fishermen on climate change technologies and the use of agro-meteorological information
Communication Strategy for Capacity Building for Adaptation of Climate Change Actors to Agricultural Production and Food Security in Benin
National Plan for Agricultural Investments and Food and Nutrition Security (2017-2021)
Strategic Plan for Climate Smart Agriculture Development (2018-2022)




Water resources


National Action Plan for the Integrated Management of Water Resources (PANGIRE)
National Strategy for Drinking Water Supply in Rural Benin
National Strategy for Drinking Water Supply in Urban Benin
Master Plan of Management and Water Management in the Ouémé Basin




forestry


National Program for Sustainable Management of Natural Resources
Capacity Building Strategy on Wildland Fire Management for Better Adaptation to Climate Change
Strategic plan for the development of mangrove ecosystems
Strategic Plan for the Development of Non-Timber Forest Products





5.2. Institutional Framework for the Implementation of the CDN
The diagram of the institutional organization selected for the implementation of the NDC is summarized in Figure 5.
Benin's contribution will be implemented under the auspices of the Ministry of the Environment, which acts as the National Focal Point of the UNFCCC with the effective participation of state and non-state actors and TFPs. The implementation of the projects and programs identified at the level of the various sectors covered by the CDN is the responsibility of the sectoral ministries concerned. The necessary guidance and facilities will be provided by the Ministry in charge of the environment to support sector ministries as needed in the preparation of funding search files at the level of mechanisms in place to assist Least Developed Countries.
Stakeholder involvement will be ensured through certain bodies including:

A steering committee that is the supreme decision-making and guidance body. It includes the Secretaries General of the relevant sector ministries, technical directors from various ministries. The Minister in charge of the environment chairs the committee and the report.
A National Coordination which is the federating entity of all the actions. It is the interface between the implementation instances. To carry out its activities, it relies on a certain number of advisory bodies including the GTEC (made of PTFs), the National Committee on Climate Change (CNCC), the platform for disaster management and forecasting, the Commission of Economic Modeling of Climate Impacts and Integration of Climate Change in the General State Budget (CMEICB), the National Association of Municipalities of Benin (ANCB). The National Coordination will also be assisted by the Expert Group on Mitigation and Vulnerability / Adaptation and Research Institutions.
Sector implementation teams. They come under the ministries covered by the measures adopted for the commitments contained in the NSC. They represent the key links in the operational. Sectoral coordination is ensured by the Directors of Programming and Foresight assisted by the Directors of Administration and Finance. They include technical directors and program and project managers.


Figure 5: Organizational Chart of the Institutional Framework for Implementing the CDN
VI. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation plan for the activities planned under the Benin NDC is presented in Annex 3. The implementation of these activities requires financial, technological and capacity-building resources.
6.1. Technology Transfer Needs
With regard to technological resources, the focus will be on endogenous technologies and South-South and North-South transfer including the necessary know-how. The main technology transfer needs identified relate to the agriculture / forestry and energy sectors (Table 12).
Table 12: Technology Transfer Needs



Energy sector
Agriculture / forestry sector


- Generators with low energy consumption
 
- Economic fireplace and efficient pressure cooker
- Butane gas and associated equipment;
- Renewable energy production equipment
- Household equipment with low energy consumption (lamps, air conditioners, appliances)
- Industrial equipment with low energy consumption

- Fertility maintenance technologies based on herbaceous legumes;
 
- agroforestry technologies based on woody legumes;
- Techniques for integrated management of soil fertility and soil moisture conservation
- Technologies for the production of organic and botanical inputs;
- Technologies based on the burying of crop residues, composting and manure use;
- Technologies for hydro-agricultural and pastoral development and infrastructure for opening up;
- Technologies for the conservation and processing of agricultural products;
- Technologies for densification of residues and agricultural waste in briquettes
- Crop varieties with short cycle and less demanding in water
- Practice of improved carbonization (Casamance grinding wheel)
- Sustainable forest management
- Green manure technologies
- Rapid growing local forest plant production technologies




6.2. Capacity building
Capacity building will consist of skills development and institutional capacity building (Table 13).
Table 13: Capacity Building Needs.



Sectors / priority areas
Capacity building needs



Climate Observation and Monitoring System

Establishment of a reliable climate observation and monitoring system for the entire climate system, including the Earth, Ocean and Atmosphere components.


Strengthening stations for measuring air pollution.


Establishment of monitoring and forecasting capabilities for atmospheric fluctuations and changes, early warning systems and assessment of socio-economic, environmental and other impacts.



Institutional frame

Strengthen existing structures that work in the field of protection of the atmosphere, land and oceans.


Establishment or strengthening of structures dealing with adaptation issues.


Establishment or strengthening of structures dealing with mitigation issues.


Definition of national climate plans and strengthening of the consideration of climate change in development programs / strategy


Integration of Climate Change issues into agricultural development policies, plans and programs.


Training of rural development actors (managers, technicians, producers, local authorities) on the issue of climate - agriculture relations.


Support for adoption of improved technologies for sustainable land management


Use of agro-climatology models (capacity building in agro-climatic risk modeling, familiarization with DSSAT software, SARRAH, etc.).


Popularization of local knowledge in risk management or agro-climatic crises.


Monitoring and evaluation of agricultural and hydro-agricultural development projects.


Training of supervisors and producers on the production system of the main food crops integrating techniques of integrated management of fertility and soil moisture conservation



energy

Promotion and improvement of access to renewable energy sources to safeguard forest resources and reduce the vulnerability of populations to the effects of climate change.


Support for the development of efficient cooking equipment markets (improved cookstoves, gas cooking equipment).


Training of public and private actors and users on renewable energy systems.


Capacity building on initiatives and energy saving measures in different sectors (domestic, industry, services).


Adoption of labels and standards for efficient lamps and electrical appliances.



Water resources

Strengthening the skills of the deconcentrated services of the General Directorate of Water to foresee risks and manage hydro-climatic crises.


Capacity building for mainstreaming climate change issues into water resources management policies.


Training of technical managers in the field of the vulnerability of water systems to climate change and the methodology for studying the vulnerability of water resources to climate change.


Development of integrated water resources management projects under Climate Change conditions.


Hydroclimatic modeling (hydrological functioning of watersheds, hydrogeological functioning of aquifers, saline intrusion process in catchment fields in the coastal zone).



Forestry / Biodiversity

Establishment of cells responsible for Climate Change issues in their relationship with biodiversity.


Consideration of the issue of Climate Change in the management of biological resources.


Training of stakeholders (policymakers, technicians, farmers, local authorities) in the development of integrated projects for the conservation of biological resources in a modified climate and in ex situ and in situ conservation methodology.


Popularization of local knowledge in the management of biological resources.


Establishment of information systems and alerts on the adverse effects of climate change on biodiversity


Valorisation of traditional knowledge in relation to climate - biodiversity.


Development and dissemination in local languages of the texts of laws and regulations relating to the management of biodiversity.


Enhancing Traditional Biodiversity Knowledge for Strengthening Carbon Sequestration Wells.



Human settlements

Integration of Climate Change issues into political, strategic, program and development plans.


Training and information of stakeholders (policy makers, health workers, populations, local authorities) on the adverse effects of climate change


Protection of socio-economic systems against degradation of the coastal environment and sea level rise.


Capacity building, at different levels, to interpret and communicate relevant climate information and to advise local communities.


Strengthening the institutional and technical capacity of the administration, civil society organizations and communities to assess local risks and vulnerabilities, and formulate climate-sensitive development plans and policies.


Promotion of practical adaptation solutions to climate variability and future risks of climate change.


Promoting knowledge building and knowledge sharing on climate change through gender-sensitive awareness raising, risk management and policy development.



Health

Training of health pyramid actors on climate change and its impact on health.


Establishment of a monitoring and information system on the impact of climate change on health.



6.3. Funding
National resources (public funds and private investments) will be supplemented by external financial support (bilateral or multilateral).
The total estimated cost for the execution of the plans, programs and projects registered under the Benin CDN amounts globally to US $ 1,367.02 million, of which US $ 3,576.39 million unconditional option and US $ 8060.63 million. US $ conditional option (Annexes 1 and 2). Mitigating and adjusting shares are 6042.33 and 5594.69 million US dollars, respectively. This estimate is based on the country's current experiences in implementing climate change mitigation and adaptation projects.
In order to measure the progress made in the implementation of these activities, monitoring and evaluation systems will be set up, including the Measurement, Notification and Verification (MRV) system.
6.4 Conditions for successful implementation of the CDN
The success of the implementation of the CDN will depend on the following conditions:

The effective and timely mobilization of national resources and the assistance expected from the international community. Difficulties in mobilizing sufficient resources could hinder the implementation of projects.
The capacity of the public structures concerned to effectively manage large-scale programs. To prevent any difficulties that may arise from the lack of capacity of these structures, it will be necessary to make a good diagnosis at the sectoral level of the staffing needs for the timely implementation of the projects; and this in the context of the development of the institutional capacity building program foreseen in the NSC.
 The effectiveness of the implementation of regulatory texts and the control of the national market of imported electrical and household appliances and the success of energy efficiency promotion operations.
The capacity of the agricultural sector to effectively promote improved farming techniques on the planned areas.
The effectiveness of technology transfer as well as the success of research and development at the national level.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
DG-Water, 2013: Realization of the master plan for water management and management of the Ouémé basin. DG Water Cotonou 194p
IMF (2016): 2015 Article IV Consultation. Press Release Staff Report and Statement by the Administrator for Benin. IMF Report No. [16/6]. https://www.imf.org/external/french/pubs/ft/scr/2016/cr1606f.pdf
NSAE (2015). RGPH4: What to keep in population in 2013, INSAE, Cotonou APRM, 2015: 2016-2018 Management Program Budget, Cotonou.64p
MAEP, 2015: Multiannual Programming Document for Expenditure 2016-2019. Cotonou, 40p. MECGCCRPRNF, 2015: Scheduled Contributions Determined at the National Level. 27p
MEHU, 2011: Second National Communication on Climate Change MSP, 2009: National Health Development Plan (2009-2018)
Ndoye D., EH Fall, Alofa JP (2016). Benign. Economic Outlook in Africa. ADB, OECD, UNDP. www.africaneconomicoutlook.org
Government Action Program 2016-2021
TCN Project (2016). Greenhouse gas inventory of the energy sector. Energy Thematic Group. DGEC, MCVDD, Cotonou. 125p.
TCN Project (2016). Greenhouse Gas Inventory of the LULUCF Sector. LULUCF thematic group. DGEC, MCVDD, Cotonou. 87p.
TCN Project (2016). Inventory of greenhouse gases in the Agriculture sector. Agriculture Thematic Group.
DGEC, MCVDD, Cotonou. 50p.
ANNEXES
Annex 1: Summary of Mitigation Measures for Planned Planned Contributions at the National Level



Objectives of the proposed measure
Quantified target (horizon 2030)
Unconditional she 
Cost in (US $ millions)
Conditional 
Cost in (millionsUS $)
Total cost in (US $ millions)



Agriculture sector



Promote improved farming techniques in the context of crop production.
Implementation of improved farming techniques over an area of 5,000,000 ha.
50%
136,50
50%
136,50
273,00


Promote soil fertility management techniques in the context of crop production.
Implementation of techniques for maintaining soil fertility over an area of 5,000,000 ha
20%
185,56
80%
742,22
927,78



Promote hydro-agricultural developments.

Development of 96500 agricultural land and construction of 180 reservoirs.
50%
263,18
50%
263,18
526,36


Development and irrigation of 52,000 ha of rice plots with water control.
50%
141,82
50%
141,82
283,64



Energy sector




Develop electric power generation from gas and renewable energy sources.

Develop a thermal power generation system (construction of a liquefied natural gas regasification terminal at the port of Cotonou + gas pipeline connection pipeline)
60 %
138,00
40
92,00
230,00


Developing renewable energies (construction of Adjarala 147 MW hydropower plants, Dogo bis 128 MW, installation of PV solar farms with a total capacity of 95 MW, structuring of a 15 MW biomass fuel sector)
60%
441,00
40%
294,00
735,00


Construct a third hydroelectric power station (development of the Vossa 60.2 MW site)
60 %
209,06
40 %
139,37
348,43



Extend household access to electric lighting to replace kerosene lighting.

Continue the implementation of projects for the electrification of localities (in total 600 localities by connection to the conventional network of SBEE).
50%
90,00
50%
90,00
180,00


SBEE Acquires 424,000 Household Connection Kits
50%
53,00
50%
53,00
106,00


Strengthen actions of efficient consumption of electrical energy in all sectors
Pursue the national energy efficiency program in all sectors: industries, tertiary, and households (implementation of standards, solar PV plants on the roofs of administrative buildings, promotion of the use of low-energy electrical equipment , promotion of solar street lightingPV etc.)
33%
6,60
66,67
13,34
19,94


Promote household access to butane gas cooking equipment (30% subsidy)
275,000 new households
33%
2,09
67%
4,25
6,34


Facilitated access to gas recharge (25% subsidy)
All user households
100%
136,67
0%
0
136,67


Promote household access to economic households using charcoal
140,000 improved stoves
33%
0,14
67%
0,29
0,43



Address current gaps in the energy databases

(15) Conducting a survey on improved stove penetration rates, gas cooking equipment and household energy consumption (whole country)
100 %
0,35
0 %
0
0,35


(16) performing tests to verify the performance of different improved stoves distributed by different actors
100 %
0,05
0 %
0
0,05


(17) Conduct a survey at the national level to supplement the information available on the vehicle fleet by data on daily fuel consumption for categories and different uses of vehicles.
100 %
0,10
0 %
0
0,10



Forestry sector



Promote high efficiency carbonization furnaces
-
0%
0
100%
4,80
4,80


Promote state, communal and private plantations
Area of 150,000 ha
10%
82,00
90%
740,00
822,00


Streamlining the exploitation of forest resources
Over an area of at least 330,000 ha;
10%
52,00
90%
460,00
512,00


Secure the boundaries of the state's forest estates;
2 664 805 ha
40%
140,00
60%
210,00
350,00


Promote alternative activities to the exploitation of forest resources.
-
10%
40,00
90%
390,00
430,00



Institutional and regulatory framework



Organize the launch workshop for the implementation of the CDN
 
100%
0,04
0%
0
0,04


Put in place the institutional framework for coordinating the implementation of the CDN
 
PM
 
 
 
 


Support sector ministries involved in the preparation of the programs included in the NDC implementation plan and project finance mobilization files under the LDC support mechanisms.
 
20%
0,08
80%
0,32
0,40


Develop and implement an Institutional and Regulatory Capacity Building Program of the Climate Change Management sub-sector;
 
100%
9,00
0%
0
9,00


Promote scientific, technical and technological research on adaptation and mitigation to climate change;
 
20%
8,00
80%
32,00
40,00


Promote the transfer of technology and know-how in climate change adaptation and mitigation.
 
0%
0,00
100%
100,00
100,00



TOTAL


35,34 %


2135,24


64,66 %

3907,09

6042,33




Annex 2: Summary of Adaptation Measures for Benin's Nationally Determined Contributions




N°


Adaptation measures, status of implementation and sources


objectives


Options and costs




unconditional


conditional


Total cost (US $ millions)



Proportion (%)
Cost (US $ millions)
Proportion (%)

Cost (US $ millions)




1

Integrated Program for Adaptation to Climate Change through the Development of Agriculture, River Transport and Tourism, in the Niger Valley in Benin (PIACC-DAT-Niger Valley in Benin) Not yet implemented

- Provide advice and warnings to stakeholders and farming communities in the event of significant weather and climate events announced, damaging to production systems
- Promote appropriate climate change adaptation agriculture production systems for food and nutrition security
- Develop new agricultural calendars allowing actors in the agricultural and pastoral economy to plan and execute production operations with good security
- Contribute to food security and strong and inclusive economic growth in Benin

8
10,20
92
117,26
127,46


Agricultural calendar adaptation project to the new context of climate change. Second National Communication Project not yet implemented
10
0, 51
90
4,60
5,11


Infrastructure Support Project in the Ouémé Valley (PAIA-VO) (2013-2020). Pilot phase under implementation (2017-2021 MAP Project)
50
63,73
50
63,73
127,46


Socioeconomic Infrastructure Development and Food Security Project (PDISSA) (Developing 750 ha of irrigated perimeters in the Niger Basin) Under development
5
1,70
95
32,38
34,08



2

National Action Plan for Integrated Water Resources Management (PANGIRE) (2011-2015). In progress

Strengthen the availability of water during dry periods to adapt populations to climate change;
Promote integrated water resources management

7
3,82
93
50,71
54,53


Multifunctional Water Infrastructure Development and Sustainable Management of Water Resources (2017-2021 MAP Project)
25
53,89
75
161,68
215,57


Development of the low and middle valley of Ouémé ( PAG project 2017-2021)
25
113,74
75
341,23
454,97



3

Reducing vulnerability of pregnant women and children under five to climate-related diseases in Benin Measure identified under PANAbut not yet implemented
Contribute to the reduction of morbidity and mortality due to malaria and other diseases related to climatic risks in Benin.
5
0,10
95
1,86
1,96



4

Coastal Zone Protection Project for Sea Level Rise / Coastal ErosionMeasurement identified under NAPA but not yet implemented under the NAPA approach
Correct sedimentary imbalance, beach loss and retreat, Restore fragile ecosystems (mangrove) and promote improved salt extraction technology combining solar and wind energy
15
0,33
85
1,88
2,21



5

LoCAL-Benin Initiative projects in 06 communes in northern Benin. (2014-2016). There is a need to extend the Initiative to all 77 municipalities in the country .
Contribute to closing the financing gap of adaptation to climate change at the level of local communities while developing their institutional and technical capacity to face climate risks and challenges in the local development process.
8
61,34
92
705,46
766,80



6

Climate Information Enhancement Project and Early Warning System in Africa for climate resilient development and adaptation to climate change (SAP-Benin 2013-2017). Project at the end of the course, to be scaled

Strengthen monitoring capacities, early warning systems and availability of climate change information to cope with climate shocks and plan climate change adaptation in Benin

5
1,58
95
29,95
31,53


Observation system strengthening project for a better monitoring of the climate and its variability in the national portion of the Niger River basin not yet implemented
5
0,39
95
7,45
7,84



7

Development of the banks of the Cotonou lagoon (2017-2021 PAG project)
Making floodable districts of the Cotonou Lagoon a green lung of the city
25
71,79
75
215,37
287,16


Sanitation and development of the banks of the Porto-Novo lagoon(2017-2021 PAG project)
Reducing the vulnerability of populations and ecosystems near the Porto Novo lagoon Climate change
25
4,57
75
13,70
18,27


Cotonou Rainwater Sanitation Project (2017-2021 PAG Project)
Resolve durably the flood problems in Cotonou by setting up sanitation infrastructures (primary collectors)
30
313,27
70
730,96
1044,23


Coastal Protection Program against Coastal Erosion (Cotonou-Siafato, Hilacondji-Bouche du Roy, Grand Popo-Ouidah)(PAG2017-2021 project)
Protecting Benin's coast against the advancing sea
60
205,97
40
137,32
343,29


8
Program for Adaptation of Cities to Climate Change in Benin(2017-2021 MAP Project)
Promote rational and sustainable management of the environment, climate change and natural resources
50
24,48
50
24,48
48,96


PAGEFCOM 2: Support Project for the Management of Communal Forests, Phase 2 (2017-2021 PAG Project)
Promoting early warning system and economic alternatives to overexploitation of Forests
50
12,86
50
12,86
25,72


Sustainable Tourism Development in W Regional Park (2017-2021 PAG Project)
Integrate climate change into tourism promotion programs
30
5,84
70
13,61
19,45


Integrated Border Management Program (2017-2021 MAP Project)
Strengthen the food, social and economic security of border populations in the context of climate change
60
10,73
40
7,15
17,88


Disaster and Risk Prevention and Management Program (2017-2021 MAP Project)
Adapt production and consumption patterns to the environmental and climatic constraints of disaster risk areas
60
1,96
40
1,30
3,26


Strengthening the Resilience of the Energy Sector to the Impacts of Climate Change in Benin (2017-2021 MAP Project)
Reduce the impacts of climate change and variability on Benin's energy sector
40
15,83
60
23,74
39,57


Support to research programs for the generation of technologies for adaptation and resilience of agricultural sectors to climate change: ARFACC (PAG project 2017-2021)
Improve the contribution of Benin's agricultural research to food security and the competitiveness of agricultural products through the strengthening of strategic research, research and development and the exploitation of research assets, in a context of climate change and devariability.
60
4,57
40
3,04
7,61


9
Sustainable Cities Program (2017-2021 MAP Project)
Set up a Housing and Housing System, an Urban and Territorial Planning System and an Environment and Resilience System.
25
445,10
75
1335,30
1780,40


Development of the development and water management scheme of the Benin portion of the Niger basin ( 2016-2024 Climate Investment Plan of the Niger Basin Authority )
Put in place a reference framework for water management in the Niger Basin
8
0,06
92
0,74
0,80


Mobilization of surface water for adaptation to climate change in the most vulnerable communes of the central and northern departments ( PANA-Benin and Climate Investment Plan 2016-2024 of the Niger Basin Authority )
Valuing surface water
8
0,30
92
3,48
3,78


Construction of ten (10) multi-purpose retaining dams in the Niger Valley (2016-2024 Climate Investment Plan of the Niger Basin Authority
Improve the availability of water for users
10
4,65
90
41,82
46,47


Rehabilitation and agricultural diversification of twenty agro-pastoral reservoirs in Benin ( 2016-2024 Climate Investment Plan of the Niger Basin Authority )
Develop pastoral hydraulics
10
0,98
90
8,81

9,79



Rehabilitation and diversification of 5 small dams of Gamagou, Gah Guessou, Sombi Kerekou, Wara and Zougou Pantrossi in the Upper Alibori ( Climate Investment Plan 2016-2024 of the Niger Basin Authority ).
Support the maintenance of water supply infrastructure in the most vulnerable localities
10
0,20
90
1,76

1,96



Construction of flood protection dikes ( Climate Investment Plan 2016-2024 of the Niger Basin Authority )
Rehabilitate local adaptation measures that have proven themselves in the face of floods
10
6,66
90
59,91
66,57


 
 
 
25,76
1441,15
74,24
4153,54
5594,69



Appendix 3: CDN Implementation Plan



activities
2017- 2020
2021- 2025
2026- 2030


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14


Phase 1: Preparatory phase of implementation of the CDN






























Establishment of the institutional framework for the implementation of the CDN
 




























Organization of the launching workshop for the implementation of the CDN
 




























Realization design study and implementation of the monitoring / verification / evaluation system


 


























Support to the sectoral ministries involved in the preparation of the programs foreseen in the NDC implementation plan and the project financing mobilization files within the framework of LDC support mechanisms.


 
 
 






















Phase 2: Implementation phase






























Implementation mitigation component at sectoral level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




AGRICULTURE SECTOR
































Government Action Program 2016-2021
 
 
 
 
 





















Project "Supporting the transition to climate-smart agriculture and food systems"
 
 
 
 
 




















Sub-program for strengthening the resilience of communities and agricultural sectors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 












Sub-Program for the Construction of Multipurpose Dams
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 












Program for strengthening actions on improved farming techniques, techniques for soil fertility management, hydro-agricultural development (2021-2030).






























Preparatory phase


 
 
 






















Implementation phase








 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




ENERGY SECTOR


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Government Action Program
 
 
 
 
 




















Program for the Development of Electricity Supply and Extension Capacities (2021-2030)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Preparatory phase


 
 
 






















Implementation phase








 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Program for strengthening actions to promote energy efficiency (2021-2030).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Preparatory phase


 
 
 






















Implementation phase








 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




UTCATF SECTOR


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Government Action Program 2016-2021
 
 
 
 
 




















Sub-program to strengthen carbon sinks and reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 












National Strategy for the Management of Vegetation Fires in Benin: Program Improvement of the management of the controlled management of wildfires


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 












Program for Strengthening Actions for the Protection and Conservation of Natural Forests and Planting (2021-2030) (Program to be fully developed during the preparatory phase of NSC implementation)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Preparatory phase


 
 
 






















Implementation phase








 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Implementation adaptation component
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Strengthening the climate risk prediction and early warning system for food security in vulnerable agro-ecological zones


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Mobilization of surface water for adaptation to climate change (micro-dams)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Fight against climate-sensitive diseases


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Protection of a coastal area from rising sea levels / coastal erosion


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Strengthening Local Governance in Financing Adaptation to Climate Change


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Capacity building in climate observation


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Strengthening the resilience of low-lying coastal cities


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Integrating climate change into sectoral development planning


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Assurance of the sustainability and resilience of Benin's main urban centers


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Integrating climate change adaptation into local strategies to reduce the vulnerability of natural and human systems in the Benin portion of the Niger Basin


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Mitigation measures of the Agriculture Sector with a co-benefit in adaptation


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Mitigation measures of the Energy Sector with a co-benefit in adaptation










 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




LULUCF mitigation measures with co-benefit in adaptation


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Implementation of Institutional and Regulatory Capacity Building Activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Develop and implement an Institutional and Regulatory Capacity Building Program of the Climate Change Management sub-sector;


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 












Promote scientific, technical and technological research on climate change adaptation and mitigation;


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Promote the transfer of technology and know-how in adapting and mitigating climate change.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Organize work to update the first CDN




 
 






 
 














