





REPUBLIC OF CUBA
NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION
UNITED NATION FRAMEWORK CONEVNTION
ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
(19/11/2015)
In accordance with decisions 1 CP 19 and 1 CP 20 of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Republic of Cuba is pleased to present its Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC, for its acronym in English).
1. Cuba's actions for sustainable development.
The strategy of economic and social development of the Republic of Cuba is characterized by giving priority to the aspirations and needs of the human being and has as main objective the constant raising of the level and quality of life of the population. The country, at the same time seeks to grow economically, preserving the environment and within a framework of social equity. The protection of the environment and the sustainable use of its natural resources have always been a priority for the Cuban State.
For this we have had to face great challenges. To the Triumph of the Revolution, on January 1, 1959, there were one million illiterates, we had no scientific research center, and there were only four experimental stations with less than a hundred people employed. Research and development programs funded by the government or by companies, whether national or foreign, were not available. The nation had three universities.
As early as January 15, 1960, then Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro Ruz said: The future of our country must necessarily be a future of men of science, it has to be a future of men of thought, because it is precisely what we are sowing most; What we are sowing more are opportunities to the intelligence . In just one year, the country developed a massive campaign to teach the people to read and write, which initiated the impetuous development of Cuban education.
In parallel, university reform began, hospitals became educational and research institutions and the first institutes were created under the direction of the Ministry of Industries and the emerging Academy of Sciences of Cuba.
During the first three decades of the Revolution, the formation of infrastructure and specialized human capital in the environmental spheres was promoted, allowing us to get acquainted with the inventory and state of the country's natural resources. Thematic networks were created or refined and the databases of scientific and technological services were expanded; Such as meteorological, hydrological, seismological, geodetic, oceanographic, radiological, and sanitary, just to name a few.
In 1976, and by agreement of the Council of Ministers, the National Commission for the Protection of the Environment and Conservation of Natural Resources (COMARNA) was created, composed of the bodies, agencies and institutions most directly involved in environmental protection and rational use of natural resources.
On January 10, 1981, the National Assembly of People's Power passed Law No. 33, Protection of the Environment and Rational Use of Natural Resources, which established the basic principles in this field and created the National Protection System Environment and the Rational Use of Natural Resources.
The speech of the then President, Fidel Castro Ruz, in Rio de Janeiro (1992), on the occasion of the Earth Summit, marked a milestone in environmental thinking, denouncing the deeper causes of the problem: the need for better distribution Riches and the application of technology for human development and not for the luxury and waste that promote consumer societies.
As soon as the Rio Summit was concluded in 1992 and based on the country's commitments, Cuba modified Article 27 of the Constitution of the Republic, which incorporates the concept of sustainable development. In the same year, the Convention on Biological Diversity and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change were signed.
In 1994, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment (CITMA) was created, an agency of the Central State Administration responsible for proposing environmental policy and directing its execution on the basis of coordination and control of the environmental management of country. Subsequently, in 1997, the National Assembly of People's Power passed the Environmental Law 81, which has served as a basis for important complementary legislation, standards and other instruments of environmental management, including regulatory and state oversight elements.
Among the country's main tools for the implementation of its environmental policy, have been the National Environmental Strategy, Sectorial and Territorial. These tools have become effective instruments, aimed at implementing actions in favor of improving environmental performance. In their conception and application, these strategies interrelate economic, social and environmental aspects, which makes them strategies for sustainable development.
Cuba achieved the goals set by the Millennium Development Goals, thanks to the will of the government that established an inclusive and humanitarian social policy since the very triumph of the revolution in January 1959. The efforts and interest of the authorities have made it possible for all Cubans, without exception, to have access to fundamental human rights such as education, health and food security, among others.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has highlighted our progress in the fight against hunger and malnutrition. Cuba has become a benchmark for food security in Latin America and the Caribbean, as it is one of the eight countries in the region that have successfully eradicated hunger.
Cuba's efforts towards sustainable development also count on other international awards. In 2006, Cuba was referred to by the Living Planet Report (World Wildlife Fund's bi-annual report) as the only country in the world with the conditions to meet the goals of sustainable development. In 2015, the Global Footprint Network identifies Cuba among the eight countries that meet the two essential conditions for achieving sustainable development, in the context of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, by combining A high welfare, with an Ecological Footprint of less than 1.7 hectares.
In order to achieve these results, the country must overcome enormous obstacles, first of all the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba for 55 years, which remains intact despite the recent reestablishment of diplomatic relations between both countries and Of some limited measures taken by the US President, which affect his application. The blockade has imposed on Cuba serious difficulties in accessing the resources, technologies, equipment and scientific and technical knowledge required for its sustainable development.
2. National Circumstances
For Cuba, confrontation with climate change is a high priority. The Cuban archipelago is very vulnerable to global climate change, given its status as a small island state located in the tropical region of the planet. Climate change is aggravating and aggravating future environmental problems1 accumulated in the nation, gradually becoming a determining factor of sustainable development.
The climate in Cuba is hotter and more extreme today. Since the middle of last century the average annual temperature has increased by 0.9 degrees Celsius. The last decade of the last century and the first decade of the present have been the warmest, according to historical measurements of temperature. The rise of sea level in the last forty years has been recorded, according to measurements in several points of the Cuban archipelago. The estimate of the average velocity of the elevation of the relative mean sea level has been determined at 1.43 mm / year. The backward rhythm of the coastline of sandy beaches has been determined at an average of 1.2 meters per year.
Great variability has been observed in cyclonic activity and we are currently at a very active stage. Since 2001 and to date have affected 8 intense hurricanes, unprecedented in history.
The rainfall regime is changing. In the last decades rains in the dry period have increased. The frequency and extent of droughts has increased significantly since 1960; With major damage in the eastern region.
Changes in water availability have been observed and a decrease in water potential is estimated. Other impacts have been observed or measured in the agriculture and human health sectors as well as in biodiversity.
In the case of the mean sea level, future projections indicate increases that would imply a slow decrease of the surface of the country and the gradual salinization of the underground aquifers, due to the advance of the so-called salt wedge. Sea level rise due to intense hurricanes and other extreme weather events will continue to represent the main danger of climate change for the Cuban archipelago due to coastal flooding and the destruction of the natural and human heritage near the coast.
Studies indicate that 2.45 per cent of the land surface by 2050 would be permanently submerged, with a sea level rise of 27cm and 5.80 per cent by 2100 with an average sea level rise 85 Cm, without considering the keys. Concerning human settlements, partial effects are estimated for 78 settlements in 2050 and 107 for 2100, while the total number of affected is 15 and 6, respectively.
This will involve sensitive affectations, if no adaptation measures are taken.
The impacts that are already felt today, associated with climate variability and the country's vulnerability, imply a large economic burden for Cuba. Losses from 16 hurricanes from 1998 to 2008 totaled $ 20.564 billion2, not including the heavy drought effects.
In this context, the Cuban Government recognizes adaptation to climate change as a priority of its policy and has encouraged the creation of capacities aimed at the knowledge and confrontation of the impacts of climate change for the present century.
The scientific-technological potential developed in the spheres of the environment has carried out, since 1991, the studies that have evidenced changes of the climate in Cuba; Their impacts and vulnerabilities; As well as major projects related to climate change and their assessment at global, national and local levels.
In October 2007, the Council of Ministers discussed climate change for the first time and adopted a program consisting of six general tasks, which prioritized adaptation in the economic and social sectors, focusing on the coastal zone and linked to the reduction Of disasters. In 2007, the first alert map on the danger and vulnerabilities of the rise of the mean sea level for Cuba was carried out, which resulted in a set of investigations, which integrate what is known as the Coastal Hazards and Vulnerability For the years 2050-2100¨ under which a large volume of information has been compiled, processed and produced, and a diversity of maps and reports on the state and perspectives of the Cuban archipelago, against the impacts of climate change, with Special attention to the rise of mean sea level, and extreme hydro-meteorological events
In this research, future predictions of the rise of the mean sea level as a result of climate change, hazards and vulnerabilities, and possible general adaptation measures for the Cuban coastal zone are updated.
The Hazard, Vulnerability and Risk (PVR) studies, initiated in 2006, contemplate natural hazards, both climatic and Others such as rural fires, landslides and earthquakes; As well as technological and health hazards. In 2011, the first phase of the execution of these studies was completed (floods due to heavy rains, floods due to coastal penetrations and damage caused by strong winds).
The applicability of these studies is diverse and includes their use in disaster reduction plans, investment analyzes, economic and social projects and programs, hazard assessment assessments, as consultation information for decision-making to Level of government and sectors, in the application in territorial planning plans, as basic information for education, and environmental disclosure and in the development of studies and research.
As a result of the presentation of the Macro-project: Hazards and Coastal Vulnerability (2050-2100) to the Council of Ministers, in February 2011, six Directives and an Action Plan were approved, resulting from scientific-technological conclusions and recommendations that moment.
The Guidelines of the Economic and Social Policy of the Party and the Revolution approved on April 18, 2011, propose the updating of the economic and social model to consolidate a prosperous and sustainable socialist society.
Regarding mitigation, Cuba's contribution to global emissions of greenhouse gases is minimal, and does not exceed 0.08% 3. Despite the low impact of emissions and the priority and cost of adaptation in the country, Cuba has systematically developed and financed mitigation actions associated with savings, the use of renewable energies, energy efficiency and Reforestation, which in some cases have played a prominent role in relation to international trends.
Since 1990, there has been a sharp reduction in the country's emissions, as a consequence of the acute economic crisis resulting from the combined effect of the disappearance of the main links and commercial conditions that Cuba had for several years with the countries of Europe. This and the worsening of the blockade by the United States.
Although the decrease in terms of Gross Domestic Product reached 35% in these years, production in general declined by more than 45%, affecting in a general way the economic and social activities and especially, fundamental economic lines such as the sugar industry. Heavy sectors were also affected in GHG emissions, such as electricity generation, the steel industry, nickel extraction and processing, as well as the building materials, transportation and other agricultural activities
3. Country Vision on nationally determined contributions and priorities in the negotiation process. 
Cuba receives nationally determined contributions as an ongoing process, which begins with the Convention in 1992, and continues today under the principles and mandates of the Convention, in particular the differentiated obligations stipulated in Article 4 of this legal instrument.
Given that the Paris Agreement is in negotiation, the contributions that are later declared by Cuba are a contribution to the previous debate that is taking place today. As a result of the presentation of the Macroproject: Coastal Hazards and Vulnerability (2050-2100) to the Council of Ministers, in February 2011, six Directives and an Action Plan were approved, resulting from the scientific-technological conclusions and recommendations available up to that time.
Since 1990, there has been a sharp reduction in the country's emissions, as a consequence of the acute economic crisis resulting from the combined effect of the disappearance of the main links and commercial conditions that Cuba had for several years with the countries of Europe. This and the worsening of the blockade by the United States. Although the decrease in terms of Gross Domestic Product reached 35% in these years, production in general declined by more than 45%, affecting in a general way the economic and social activities and especially, fundamental economic lines such as the sugar industry. Also impacted were sectors of great weight in GHG emissions, such as electricity generation, steel industry, nickel extraction and processing, as well as construction materials industry, transportation and other agricultural activities implementation, Cuba will reconsider the Information to submit to the Convention.
In order to achieve the expected results in climate negotiations and in the implementation of national contributions, it is essential to consider the following elements:
Climate finance and technology transfer are a crucial aspect of the negotiations for a comprehensive, binding agreement applicable to all in Paris. Access to new and additional financial resources and to environmentally sound technologies has been a historic claim of developing countries to advance the path of sustainable development.
This claim has been endorsed at the various summits on environment and development and related issues since the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro (1992) as a basic aspect of the application of the principles of common but differentiated responsibilities, And equity.
In the context of climate change negotiations, these issues have remained at the forefront of the discussions and agreements reached since the adoption of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. However, its progress in practice has been limited.
Without the determination of a clear and forward-looking commitment to climate finance behavior and technological support, a greater contribution from developing countries will not be possible, nor will a lasting global agreement be possible.
While progress has been made in conceptualizing these issues, significant gaps remain to be covered, and the realization of the requirements for transferring financial resources and technologies from developed to developing countries remains well below levels Needs and international commitment of the donor community.
In this regard, the amounts committed (including the resources announced for the Green Climate Fund) are extremely limited in relation to adaptation and mitigation needs identified in developing countries, and often more than fresh resources are  Recycled or subtracted from official development aid flows, which are far from the commitments of developed countries in this area.
An area of particular interest to developing countries, particularly the least developed and small island states, is access to financing and technologies on preferential terms to address the enormous challenges of adaptation to climate change, as well as Losses and damages. These issues, given their high priority, should be properly addressed as part of the implementation of the means of implementation, and the commitments of the developed countries in this are
The definition of a transparent road map for the financial support of developed countries to climate change response actions of developing countries remains a pending issue. This road map would indicate goals to meet from the present to the target of 100 billion dollars committed as a base by developed countries by 2020, and beyond
Although all sources, including public funds and private, bilateral and multilateral flows, among others, can contribute to the necessary financing required by developing countries, priority should be given to public financing. The role of private financing and investment flows can not be overestimated, given the instability and volatility of such flows, such as that which has prevailed since 2008. What happened in the global carbon markets during this period of economic contraction and deceleration reveals the above.
With regard to access to appropriate technologies by developing countries - including those with low carbon intensity - it will be necessary for developed countries, among other things, to remove trade barriers that affect these flows, such as those associated with standards, more stringent and uniform protection of intellectual property. Support for basic R & D investments in developing countries should also be prioritized as a precondition for advancing resilient sustainable development paths.
On the basis of the principles and concepts outlined above, and in the context of its socialist project and sustainable economic and social development, Cuba will continue to contribute to efforts to strengthen the implementation of the Convention, both in adaptation and mitigation.
4. Specific elements of the National Contribution of Cuba.



ADAPTATION
The adaptation elements included in this contribution are presented to indicate Cuba's priorities according to their circumstances and do not indicate in any way an international obligation of the country in the context of climate negotiations.




Main actions
Adaptation is a priority for Cuba.
In accordance with the studies and evaluations carried out so far, the main adaptation actions that may constitute contributions from the country are:

Reduce coastal vulnerability to settlements threatened by rising sea levels and rising sea levels due to hurricanes and waves.
To recover the most affected mangrove areas of the Cuban archipelago and to stop, as far as possible, the deterioration of coral reef ridges.
Incorporate the adaptation dimension into programs, plans and projects related to food production, integrated water management, land management, forestry, fisheries, tourism and health.
Form an environmental monitoring network, allowing the systematic evaluation of climate and environmental trends for decision-making.
Reduce vulnerability in the health sector, based on a better understanding and understanding of the relationships between climate variability, climate change and human health, in two essential areas: infectious diseases and the Surveillance System And Early Warning of the sector.
Sustaining and developing research to protect, conserve and rehabilitate the environment and adapt environmental policy to new projections of the economic and social environment. Prioritize studies aimed at confronting climate change and, in general, the sustainability of the country's development. Emphasize the conservation and rational use of natural resources such as soils, water, beaches, the atmosphere, forests and biodiversity, as well as the promotion of environmental education4



Financing of adaptation actions
Cuba expressly identifies, in the Annual Plan of the Economy, resources destined to the adaptation. These figures for the future will have the level that the financial possibilities of the country allow. Responding to the growing impacts of climate change will require much higher amounts.
These and other areas associated with the economic and social development of the country will require financial resources, technology and capacity building from international cooperation and compliance with the obligations of the industrialized countries under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.


MITIGATION


Sustained commitment of Cuba, with the objectives of mitigation of the Convention
Cuba has made a major effort in conducting programs that lead to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. It was one of the first countries in the world to start replacing incandescent light bulbs (2005), and since 1959 has maintained a steady increase in its forest cover.
In 1997, the Electricity Saving Program in Cuba (PAEC) was created and since 2006 the Programs of the Energy Revolution in Cuba have been implemented, including:

The change of: 9.4 million incandescent light bulbs per saving bulbs; 2.6 million refrigerators; One million fans; 260 thousand motor pumps; 247 thousand televisions; 230 thousand air conditioners; Installation of 2400 MW of distributed generation with high efficiency engines (fuel and diesel).
Rehabilitation of electricity distribution networks.
The strengthening of savings and efficient use of energy in the state sector, mainly in the high consumers.
Outreach campaigns for the promotion of population and school savings policies on energy efficiency. In 2012, the National Office for the Control of the Rational Use of Energy (ONURE) was created and the state inspection of the efficient use of energy carriers was strengthened. The development of renewable energy has been a priority for the country for decades. 



Profile of current emissions
According to the latest GHG inventory, with 2010 statistical closure, gross emissions amounted to approximately 40 million tonnes of eq CO2, equivalent to 84% of emissions compared to the base year 1990. Of the total GHGs emitted in the Year 2010, approximately 76% Corresponded to the energy sector, which covers all emissions from fuel combustion (energy generation, transportation, industries). The agriculture sector is still important with 15% of the total emissions, with the remainder divided between waste and industry (9%).
Forests greatly influence Cuba's net GHG inventory emissions by removing approximately 14.3 million tonnes of CO2 according to data from the latest inventory. This is a result of the sustained growth of forest cover in Cuba, from 13.9% of the territory, to the triumph of the Revolution, to 29.4% in 2014.


General Considerations on Cuba's Mitigation Contributions
Cuba will continue to show its commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, in accordance with its national circumstances and with the financial and technological resources available to it, aimed at modernization and technological development on a basis of sustainability, as well as strengthening Of their capabilities.The amount of its contribution will depend on the fulfillment of the international obligations established under the Convention
For any action that is considered, the possible co-benefits in adaptation will be assessed


Proposed Contribution (s)
Based on the potential of renewable sources available in the country, it is planned to install 2 144 MW of power connected to the national electricity grid, which includes the construction of:

19 bioelectrical plants annexed to sugar mills with 755 MW from sugarcane and forest biomass.
13 wind farms with 633 MW.
700 MW Photovoltaic and,
74 small hydroelectric plants

It is estimated that the realization of these programs will allow the generation of more than 7 thousand GWh a year with renewable sources, leaving to emit to the atmosphere more than 6 million tons of CO2.
The execution of these programs demands a financial amount of not less than 4 billion dollars.
In addition, we work on other projects that include:

The installation of 200 thousand 2 of solar heaters in the residential and industrial sectors.
The installation of solar pumps in agriculture.
The use of organic waste for the production of biogas and the production of bio-fertilizer replacing chemical fertilizers will contribute to the reduction of emissions and the reduction of pollution of watersheds and bays. Special attention has the residues of animal production, industry and urban solids.

On the other hand, to increase the efficiency in the use of energy, the new energy policy provides, among other actions, the following:

The installation of LED technology with the distribution of 13 million lamps in the residential sector and 250 thousand luminaires for public lighting.
The replacement of 2 million electric resistance cookers by induction cookers.

The development and linking of the national industry with these programs is an essential objective of the policy for the assimilation, development and production of equipment and means for the use of renewable sources and the elevation of energy efficiency


Kind of
contribution
The contributions that the country would assume in the current circumstances are of the type of policies and projects.


Goal year
The time horizon of the national contribution is 2030. Depending on the outcome of the negotiations of the Paris Agreement, in the section on periods, Cuba will study the possibility of communicating indicative targets in other interim periods.


Prioritized Sectors (Scope)
Taking into account the sector's contribution to the national GHG inventory, the sectors prioritized for the reduction of emissions, which may constitute contributions at present, are the energy and agriculture sectors.


Expected gases (Coverage)
Among the GHGs recognized under the Kyoto Protocol, the planned emission reduction actions refer mainly to three gases: CO2, CH4, N2O.


Requirements in means of implementation for the contribution (s)
The implementation of the actions identified for adaptation and mitigation require the support of international cooperation and financing mechanisms for climate change.
There is also a need to increase access to the Convention Technology Facility (Technology and Technology Executive Center and Climate Technology Network) to facilitate the development and transfer of technology by supporting the deployment of mitigation and adaptation technologies.


CONTRIBUTION OF CUBA TO INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION.


From the experience accumulated, our country has shared its results with other developing nations, especially the small island states. The paths have varied from bilateral collaboration to actions with the support of developed countries and international organizations.
With international assistance, Cuba today has a Capacity Building Center for Disaster Risk Reduction and Adaptation to Climate Change, which has carried out many activities and still has greater potential to continue to promote South - South cooperation.
Cuba considers that these are national actions that contribute to the effective implementation of the Convention, and reaffirms its willingness to continue to cooperate in the development of capacities in the fight against climate change, including:

Technical assistance in the preparation of national communications and inventories of greenhouse gases.
Development of modeling and climate projections.
Implementation and implementation of Hazard, Vulnerability and Risk Studies.
Assessments of coastal vulnerability and impacts of extreme events and climate change as part of the environmental impact assessment of development projects and projects



SOVEREIGN LAW TO AMEND CONTRIBUTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES


Cuba reserves the right to adjust its contributions:

In the event of serious damage caused by an extreme natural phenomenon or another case of force majeure.
When adequate support is not available in the form of financing, technology transfer and capacity-building, in accordance with the commitments established for industrialized countries in the Convention.







The current National Environmental Strategy recognizes as environmental problems: Degradation of soils, affectations to forest cover, pollution, loss of biological diversity and lack of water↩
Source: Guidelines for the Economic and Social Policy of the Party and the Revolution (2011)↩
Corresponding to the GHG Inventory for the year 2010↩
Corresponding to the Inventory Corresponds to Guideline 133 of the Guidelines for the Economic and Social Policy of the Party and the Revolution.↩




