




Republic of Equatorial Guinea
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
CONTRIBUTIONS PLANNED AND DETERMINED AT NATIONAL LEVEL (NATIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS) (CPDN)
Malabo, September of 2015
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the requirements of the nineteenth Conference of the Parties (CoP-19) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), held in Warsaw, Poland, in 2013, was to invite countries Parties to make efforts to initiate and intensify preparations for the elaboration of so-called Nationally Determined and Predicted Contributions (CPDNs or INDCs). For the sole purpose of achieving a global compromise that tends to minimize greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, in a binding global agreement.
The convention has considered the year 2015 as a key in the negotiations and a lot of expectation for the future of Mother Earth, depending on the Agreement on Global Climate Change; The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), is mandated by COP17 in Durban, South Africa, to approve a binding agreement at COP21 in Paris, which was the priority theme of COP20 in Lima. In December 2014, thus adopting decision 1 / COP20. As an indicator of the political support of the parties, an initiative has been taken to implement the NDCPs, with priority being their scope, definition, obligatoriness as well as their transparency.
In order to ensure the applicability of the above, most of the Parties to the Convention are prepared to participate in the common fight against climate change. In effect, it has been determined that Contributions will be submitted to the Secretariat of the Convention no later than October 1, 2015, for consideration in the preparation of the Final Agreement. For this reason, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea as a Party to the Convention has been pleased to prepare and submit this Contribution; It reflects the reality of the country and justifies the political will of the Government to combat the effects of climate change.

Objective of Contribution

Establish mechanisms for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) in the long term; To place the progression of countries in the fight against climate change in the period 2030-2050 in line with the post-2050 trajectory, in order to contain the increase in global warming below 2 ° C in relation to the pre-industrial period. The Contribution of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has been elaborated under the supervision of the Ministry of Fisheries and Environment, through the General Directorate of the Environment through the collaboration of: Group of Experts of the National Coordination of Climate Change and The International Technical Assistance. The data collected in the documentation are of national and international origin, with a participatory approach of key actors such as: Representatives of Sectoral Ministries, civil society, Civil Society Organization, Private Sector, Bilateral and Multilateral Cooperation. Due to its character, the contributions planned and determined at national level in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea are articulated in two main thematic axes:
I. Adaptation to climate change, as a vulnerable country; Including:

Integration of climate change and climate variability issues into national, regional and local planning policies and processes;
Implementation of strategies for risk reduction and adaptation measures at pilot sites;
Strengthen technical capacity to integrate climate risks into coastal zone management, and
Disseminate lessons learned to key stakeholders

II. The mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) to the atmosphere, taking into account the most influential sectors in the national climate impact:

Sector Forestry, Agriculture and Land Use Change
Waste Sector
Energy Sector
Transportation Sector

To do this, it is essential to guarantee both national and international funding, in order to meet identified needs.
2. COUNTRY CONTEXT
Located near the equator in the Gulf of Guinea, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea; It borders the Republic of Cameroon, South and East with Gabon, and to the west with the Equatorial Atlantic Ocean. It shares the maritime borders with Nigeria, Sao Tome and Principe, Gabon and Cameroon (Figure 1). The country is comprised of two regions: the island region and the continental region comprising much of the country's area; The other insular part comprising the islands of Bioko, Annobon located in the Southern Hemisphere, as well as the islets of Corisco, Elobey Grande, Elobey Chico and Mbañe. It has a total surface area of 28,051.46 km2.
The Country has an Exclusive Economic Zone (sea area) of 314,000 km², 11 times greater than the surface of the mainland; With 600 km of coastline, which is usually rough, with some bays and cables standing out.
Equatorial Guinea's climate is rainy rainforest according to Köppen, with traits of tropical savanna at its easternmost end. The geographical conditions that significantly modify the climate of the territory in its mainland (Muni River) are the existence of the coast and the relief of the southern portion, mainly in the southeast part where is located Mount Mitra (1200 m) . The population of Equatorial Guinea is 1,014,999 inhabitants, with more than 70% of the population living in rural areas, and the economy largely depends on the extraction of oil and liquefied gas, as well as the export of wood, cocoa and coffee.

Figure 1. Map of Equatorial Guinea
3. COUNTRY PROFILE IN THE CONTEXT OF CLIMAE CHANGE
3.1. Emissions of Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
It should be noted that, in the global context, the increase in CO2 emissions accelerated after the year 2000, increasing by 35% between 2000 and 2011, compared to 10% of the increase recorded between 1990 and 2000. This was mainly due To the rapid increase in emissions in developing regions. Moreover, in developed regions, the average per capita CO2 emissions have been considerably higher than in the developing regions (World Bank, 2011). [See: World Bank. World Atlas of Data (2000-2010). Available at: http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators. ]
Despite global trends, however, in Equatorial Guinea, there was a considerable reduction whether seen in total per capita amounts or per dollar of GDP. It is noteworthy that, from levels of 10.6 metric tons per capita in 2003, it was able to reduce emissions to 6.7 metric tons per capita in 2010 by reducing tree felling and other measures (Bank World, 2011) [Ibit].
3.2. Categories and Fonts
For the planning of the Greenhouse Gas Inventory in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, some sectors were selected based on the level of their emissions.

3.3. Emissions added in CO2 equivalents (CO2eq)
The small importance of CO2 emissions by forests in the country makes when the analysis incorporates emissions and removals from the Land Use Change and Forestry sector, the country's net emissions are reduced very little compared to Gross emissions.

Figure 3.-Emisiones de CO2 eq (Gg) por GEI. Guinea Ecuatorial,2013.
As can be seen in figure 3, in CO2eq emissions, Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and Methane (CH4) have the greatest contribution to heating, while Nitrous Oxides (N2O) contributions are practically negligible in the country With only 1% of emissions.
3.4. Emissions per capita of CO2 and other GHGs in CO2 equivalence
Figure 4 shows the results obtained in the calculation of the annual per capita emissions of CO2 and GHG for the year evaluated in the 2013 report; Gross CO2 emissions (in Gg CO2) and gross aggregate GHG emissions (in Gg CO2eq) are used for this calculation, which are the most frequently used indices for this purpose internationally.
Figure 4. Per capita emissions of CO2 (t CO2 / person), and other GHGs (t CO2 - eq / person). Equatorial Guinea, 2013.

3.5. Degree of vulnerability, loss and damage
Although levels of national CO2 emissions have declined over the period 2003-2010, there are indications that impacts may be latent. In fact, the change in environmental factors is becoming increasingly acute both in the Insular Region and in the Continental, taking as reference the same time intervals.


Figure 5.- Variation of the monthly values of the surface temperature for the period 1951-2019. The red line represents a moving average of 12 pts. Source: Ministry of Fisheries and Environment, 2013. PANA. Figure nº12 on page 34.
Equatorial Guinea, lacking meteorological stations for the measurement and evaluation of climatic factors (agrometeorology, hydrometeorology, wind isobars, etc.), is limited in knowledge about climate change and its effects. Based on the forecasts, it is exposed to greater rainfall variability (drought in general, higher showers and sunny days), higher temperatures and an increase in sea level (along with more frequent storms and waves). The population is confirming changes in climate behavior such as more frequent storms, floods, drought of springs and generally higher temperatures (MPMA, PANA, 2013). All of this justifies their high vulnerability. The sectors that are most vulnerable to climate change are agriculture, fishing, energy, housing, education, sanitation, drainage, health and the environment. The losses resulting from these damages, despite being very considerable, are currently difficult to quantify economically in the absence of statistical records.
4. Level of Ambition 
Equatorial Guinea is a developing country whose economy depends exclusively on extractive industries and has to face a number of development challenges, such as poverty, education, health, road infrastructure, etc. Although, in terms of emissions, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea represents less than 0.1% of global emissions, however, the emissions trends of some economic sectors are important, especially energy, CO2 emissions from the Biomass, extractive industrial processes and changes in land use.
In 2007, the Government adopted the National Plan for Economic and Social Development (PNDES) to Horizon 2020, which fits in perfectly with the Millennium Development Goals and the ambitions to reduce CO2 emissions; Since it is committed to the diversification of the economy, with a focus on the green economy (tourism, forestry, business, etc.).
Based on the above, Equatorial Guinea's ambition is to reduce its emissions by 20% by 2030, compared to 2010 levels; With a view to achieving a 50% reduction by 2050. This is conditional on favorable and predictable support and that climate finance mechanisms be made viable and distortions of existing market mechanisms corrected. Favorable technical and financial support is needed from both the national government and the international community.
5. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, aware that climate change is a phenomenon with an international dimension, which is a priority and within the framework of its development policy, has established actions on the basis of very clear objectives and orientations through Of state structures, local communities, the private sector as well as civil society organizations. This guidance is based on: adaptation and mitigation measures.
5.1. Adapting to climate change
With the adoption of the National Action Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAPA) in 2013, the country develops the strategy to promote resilience to climate change in all sectors, with concrete proposals in the short and medium term. Among the proposed actions are:

Periodic diagnoses on climate vulnerability at the national level, according to international standards;
Construction of meteorological stations throughout the country for the proper monitoring of climatic factors in each area of the territorial administration;
Installation of early warning systems for climate risks and other natural disasters;
Periodic analysis of the resilience capacity of all infrastructures undertaken and ongoing;
Location of rainfall stations at hydroelectric plants to monitor changes in rainfall;
Establishment of mechanisms to achieve integrated management of watersheds;
Promotion of agricultural production systems with better resilience to climate change;
Restoration of different ecosystems susceptible to losing their resilie

5.2. Mitigation of GHG emissions
5.2.1 Energy Sector
The Government will strengthen current initiatives in the electricity sector by taking advantage of available renewable resources, highlighting the following actions:

Development and adoption of an Energy Law.
Use of the hydroelectric potential of the Wele River, for the electrification of the entire Continental Region of the country.
Renovation and refurbishment of the Musola hydroelectric centers (0.4-0.5 MW), Riaba (3.8 MW), for the electrification of the entire island of Bioko. And Bikomo in the continental region (3.2 MW).
Bet on wind, solar and / or tidal power options for the remote islands of the country (Annobón, Corisco and others).

5.2.2. Transport Sector

Acquisition of aircraft equipped with high technology;
Improvement of air, land and maritime traffic managemen
Continuation of the modernization of airport infrastructures, road traffic and port infrastructures;
Promotion of collective urban and inter-urban transport for the reduction of emissions due to the proliferation of individual transport.

5.2.3. Sector Forestry. Agriculture and Land Use Change

Promotion of a policy based on land management and classification, by means of cadastres.
Implementation of the Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD +).
Convert Equatorial Guinea into a reference country for climate-smart agriculture for the tropics with the objectives of ensuring food security, diversifying the national economy, limiting methane and nitrous oxide emissions, as well as promoting carbon capture.
Implementation of National Adaptation and Mitigation Actions (NAMA's) to accompany the REDD + strategy.
Construction of ecologically sustainable cities with new home energy mechanisms, with many green spaces and an optimal approach to waste management.
Implementation of the National Strategy and Plan of Action on the Conservation of Biological Diversity (ENPADIB) and reinforcement of the National System of Protected Areas (SNAP) with the incorporation of the UNESCO Biosphere Reserve Program,
Creation of two World-class Observatories, such as:

A Global High Mountain Observatory on Climate Change associated with the Global Climate Change and Research Initiative GLOCHAMORE on Lake Loreto (southern Bioko Island).
An observatory of Monsoon in Equatorial Africa, in Monte Alen (Continental Region)


5.2.4. Industrial Sector

Promotion of industrial policy based on the use of new technologies
Adoption of directives on types of machinery and setting emission limits
Adoption of directives on optimal production methods of operation.

5.2.5 Waste Sector

Promotion of the policy of efficient treatment of waste and construction of plants for the recycling and reuse of waste.

6. FINANCING
6.1. For Climate Change Adaptation 
Table 1: Adaptive actions and their estimated costs (in millions of US $)



Actions
estimated cost


2015-2030
2030-2050




Carrying out periodic diagnoses on climate vulnerability at the national level, according to international standards
12,3
14,5


Construction of meteorological stations throughout the national scope for the proper monitoring of climatic factors in each area of ​​the territorial administration
17,5
13,5


Installation of early warning systems for climate risks and other natural disasters
15,2
28,7


Periodic analysis of the resilience capacity of all infrastructures undertaken and ongoing
11,5
22,3


Location of rainfall stations in hydroelectric plants to monitor changes in rainfall
16,5
31,2


Establishment of mechanisms to achieve integrated management of watersheds
12,7
25,3


Promotion of agricultural production systems with better resilience to climate change
13,5
17,3


Restoration of different ecosystems susceptible to losing their resilience
15,3
18,5


Total
114,5
171,3



6.2. For the mitigation of GHG emissions 
Tabla 2: Attenuation sectors and their estimated costs (in millions of US $)



Sectors
estimated costs


2015-2030
2030-2050




Energy sector
544,5
914,7


Transportation Sector
834,6
1324,5


Forestry sector
623,7
836,3


Agriculture and Land Use Chnage Industrial Sector
1435,3
2356,8


Waste sector
235,2
523,5


Total
3673,3
5955,8



6.3. For other institutional and capacity building needs
Tabla 3: Other needs and their estimated costs (in millions of US $)



Thematic
estimated costs


2015-2030
2030-2050




Institutional Needs
44,5
64,2


Information, Awareness and Education on Climate change
24,8
32,3


Training and research applied to Climate Change
83,7
123,7


Total
153,0
220,2



7. NEEDS
7.1. Institutional needs

Raise the issue of Climate Change to the rank of Secretary of State;
The creation of a Committee for the Economic Modeling of Climate Impacts and the Integration of Climate Change into the State budget;
Creation of a National Committee on Climate Change;
Creation of a service in charge of Assessments of Environmental Impacts and National Environmental Audits according to the international standards.

7.2. Information, awareness and education on climate change

Development of information and awareness programs on the threats of climate change to increasingly cover the general public.
Development of modules of formal and informal education regarding the importance and conservation of the environment;
Publication of magazines, brochures, environmental agendas and other material to promote environmental awareness at the national level.
Development of joint action plans on the conservation of biodiversity, combating desertification, to strengthen the synergy between the three Rio conventions and other signatories in the country.

7.3. Training and research applied to climate change

Development of training modules specialized in adaptation and mitigation techniques
Operation and equipment of the National Institute for the Conservation of the Environment (INCOMA), for applied environmental research.
Promotion of scientific and technological research in adaptation and mitigation.
The provision of geographical information system (GIS) laboratories to the National University of Equatorial Guinea (UNGE) and the professional schools of the forestry and environmental branch for climate modeling and promotion of research habits,
Development of competitions and offers of research of different modalities on the domain of climate change.
Operationalization of the National Fund for the Environment (FONAMA)




CPDN Drafting Team





Nicanor ONA NZE ANGUAN (Higher Forest Engineer): Focal Point and National Coordinator of Climate Change
Antonio MICHA ONDO ANGUE (Environment Expert): Focal Point and National Coordinator to Combat Deforestation and Soil Degradation
Santiago Francisco ENGONGA OSONO (Biologist and Geographer): General Director of Environmen
Jean VIGNON (Agricultural Engineer): French Cooperation Adviser in Equatorial Guinea
Ricardo DOMINGUEZ LLOSA (Geographer): Senior Technical Advisor of the GEF-SNAP Project



Review Team


Excmo. Sr. Estanislao DON MALAVO: Ministro de Pesca y Medio Ambiente
Excma. Sra. Adoración SALAS CHONCO: Secretaria de Estado de Pesca y Medio Ambiente
Sr. D. Demetrio IVITI NSUGA (Ingeniero Técnico Agrónomo): Punto Focal de la Capa de Ozono


Citation of the document


Ministerio de Pesca y Medio Ambiente (MPMA). Contribuciones Previstas Determinadas a nivel Nacional. Malabo, Agosto de 2015.


Support material: (I) Informe sobre inventario nacional de gases de efecto invernadero de 2013, por el MPMA con el apoyo financiero de GEF; (II) Plan de Acción Nacional para la Adaptación al cambio climático (PANA), adoptado en 2013, por el MPMA gracias al apoyo financiero de GEF/PNUD; y (III) Programa de Desarrollo Socio-económico Horizonte 2020, Ministerio de Planificación y Desarrollo Económico; Primera Comunicación Nacional de Cambio Climático en Guinea Ecuatorial. (IV) Documento de proyecto “Energía sostenible para todos”-PIMS 5143.





