




REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
ANTICIPATED AND DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
1. PRESENTATION
Given the urgency of taking collective action necessary to avoid an increase in temperature and dangerous climate variability; in accordance with decisions 1 / CP.19 and 1 / CP.20 of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); responding to the call of Lima [1] , and in its effort to contribute to achieving the objective contained in Article 2 of the Convention, Guatemala presents to the Secretariat of the UNFCCC its "Contribution Planned and Determined at the National Level" (INDC for its acronym in English).
Guatemala is particularly vulnerable to the effects of Climate Change, of which it will have to bear an abnormal and disproportionate burden, a situation that threatens its population, its patrimony, the production of food and the means of subsistence, preventing economic and social development Continue in a sustainable manner. The foregoing, highlights the need to make a global call to fulfill common but differentiated responsibilities and, with this, to the provision of robust, sustainable, transparent, predictable and additional resources. that accompany the development of this INDC presented by the country as well as that of the other most vulnerable countries.
The presentation of this INDC happens in the context of a country that has just stabilized a political crisis. In this scenario, the National Council on Climate Change (created by Decree 7-2013 [2] , hereinafter the Framework Law on Climate Change, and made up of government entities, universities, indigenous peoples, peasants, the private sector, non-governmental organizations ) encourages compliance with the State's commitments to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and joins in a country effort, so that, despite its conditions and circumstances, it responds to the global call of the Nations.
The contributions contained in the INDC will be incorporated into the National Development Plan -KATUN 2032- of the country in an articulated, coherent and systemic effort with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) by 2030, with a low emission focus. The above, complying with the mandates of the National Climate Change Policy (Government Agreement 329-2009), the Framework Law on Climate Change and its safeguards (Article 3), human rights, gender equity, rights of indigenous peoples and the principles recognized internationally by the country.
This INDC is presented without prejudice to the legal nature that it comes to have, as well as the content of a protocol or other instrument or result, which is agreed with legal force, applicable to all parties under the Framework of the Convention in reference.
2. CONTEXT
Guatemala has great natural and cultural wealth. It is among the 19 Megadiverse countries of the planet, with 33.7% of its territory with forest cover. Their native forests contribute significantly to the livelihoods of local populations. About a third of the national territory has been declared a protected area and has a great wealth of ecosystem goods and services. The pluricultural wealth of the country and the traditional and ancestral knowledge of its different peoples, constitutes a potential for the implementation of the INDC.
The country is part of an isthmus and is located in a highly vulnerable region, located between three intercontinental plates and with particular hydrological and geomorphological characteristics. Located in an area of intertropical convergence and in the area of influence of El Niño and La Niña phenomena and between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans it makes it vulnerable and fragile. It is located on the route of tropical hurricanes and storms in the Caribbean [3] .
Guatemala is exposed to extreme events. In the last sixteen years (1998 to 2014), there has been an accumulated total of eight extreme hydro-meteorological events linked to climate change (hurricanes and tropical storms Mitch, 1998, Stan, 2005, Agatha, 2010, and some tropical depressions). and important droughts). Accumulated losses and damages amount to more than US $ 3.5 billion, distributed mainly in the affected sectors of infrastructure, agriculture and health. Between 1998 and 2010, climatic variability caused economic losses in the agricultural sector in the order of US $ 1.85 billion.
It is expected to increase the magnitude and frequency of natural phenomena such as storms, droughts, frosts, which especially impact the most vulnerable populations of the country and that entails: I) the reduction of water availability and quality; II) the displacement of pests, vectors, commensals, predators and diseases to new geographical zones; III) the alterations and blockages in the food chain in the terrestrial and marine-coastal systems; IV) the increase of forest fires due to droughts and pests; V) the loss of infrastructure; VI) the increase in food insecurity due to loss of crops; VII) the destruction of natural spaces and biological diversity; VIII) negative impacts on all human means of subsistence, cultural identity and traditional and ancestral knowledge; Y, IX) the reduction of the quantity and quality of the soil; among others.
According to the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) and data from the IPCC, ANNEX I.8 e), the socio-environmental vulnerability of the country is manifested in the prevailing high levels of poverty (approximately 51% of the population in poverty and 15% in extreme poverty), 49% child malnutrition and the low human development index (HDI). The most affected population groups are indigenous peoples, subsistence farmers, artisanal fishermen and, among them, women and children.
Although Guatemala is the largest economy in Central America, it is located within the countries with the highest levels of inequality in Latin America, with high rates of poverty -particularly in rural areas and indigenous peoples- and with rates of chronic malnutrition and maternal mortality. child of the highest in the region. What results in the lowest Human Development Index (HDI) in Latin America.
Based on information from the World Bank (Banco de Guatemala) country has maintained an average annual economic growth of 4.2% between 2004 and 2007. It is expected that the average annual growth in 2015-2016 will be 3.6%, driven by private consumption and an increase in exports and remittances. However, the impacts related to climate variability in Guatemala have an effect of 1.3% to 3.7% per annum on gross domestic product (GDP) and it is estimated that between 40% and 70% of the impact is on the agricultural sector.
In terms of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, Guatemala contributes less than 0.1% of global emissions and its emissions are 2.48 tCO 2 e / capita, by 2005 it is considerably lower than the average of the per capita emissions of the country. region of Latin America and the Caribbean (4.6 tCO 2 e / capita).
The State of Guatemala has initiated concrete actions to face the challenges posed by climate change. Guatemala has a National Climate Change Policy and one of the first climate change laws worldwide: Framework Law on Climate Change, through which the National Council on Climate Change was created (Article 8), which integrates the sectors of the country (government, municipalities, mayors and indigenous authorities, private, peasant, non-governmental organizations, indigenous and universities).
Additionally, there are efforts of other sectors of society, such as: the National Board, the Indigenous Table of Climate Change, the Guatemalan System of Climate Change Sciences, the Private Institute of Research on Climate Change of the sugar industry.
3. MITIGATION
 
3.1. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
 
Guatemala has carried out four national inventories of GHG emissions for the years 1990, 1994, 2000 and 2005. The methodology used to calculate the National Inventories of Greenhouse Gases corresponds to the "IPCC Guidelines for the Realization of National Greenhouse Gases." 1996 ", assuming the values of the global warming potentials (GWP, for its acronym in English) of the second report of the IPCC (SAR).
Only the inventory of the year 1990 has been made official through the First National Communication. The additional inventories are in the process of being reviewed and will be presented as part of the Second National Communication.
The analysis of the trend shown in the four inventories carried out indicates that in the period 1990-2005 the country has had an average growth of emissions corresponding to 0.90 million tons of CO 2 equivalent per year. Likewise, the emissions reported in the last available inventory (base year 2005) show that the country issued a total of 31.45 million tons of CO 2 equivalent (see Figure 1). The inventories used in the base study included all emissions from the energy, industrial processes, agriculture, waste and -UTCUTS- sectors. Removals from the LULUCF sector.
Applying the trend growth of the period 1990-2005 to the base emissions of the year 2005, a total emission for the year 2030 was projected of 53.85 million tons of CO 2 equivalent, which corresponds to the base value on which the proposed reductions are calculated.
 
3.2. QUANTIFIABLE SUMMARY OF ASPIRATION
 
 
3.2.1.Not Conditioned Proposal
 
According to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and their current capacities, Guatemala plans to achieve a reduction of 11.2% of its total GHG emissions from the 2005 base year projected to the year 2030. This reduction of 11.2% implies that emissions, in a tendential scenario (BAU for its acronym in English) of 53.85 million tons of CO 2 equivalent for the year 2030, will be reduced to a value of 47.81 million tons of CO 2 equivalent in that year.
Figure 1: Trends of emissions and contributions of Guatemala
 
3.2.2.Conditioned Proposal
 
Guatemala proposes a more ambitious reduction than the previous one, of up to 22.6% of its total GHG emissions from the 2005 base year projected to the year 2030. This reduction of 22.6% implies that emissions, in a trend scenario (BAU) of 53.85 million tons of CO 2 equivalent for the year 2030, would be reduced to a value of 41.66 million tons of CO 2 equivalent in that year (see Figure 1). As a condition to achieve this ambitious goal, it will be necessary to have the necessary technical and financial support from public and private, new and additional international resources.
The sectors of the national economy with the greatest need to support the implementation of policies and strategies to reduce emissions are: forests, agriculture and transport.
The transport subsector presents investment opportunities for the improvement of urban mobility based on efficient mass transport that favors the productivity of all sectors of the country and contributes to a significant reduction in emissions.
The data presented in this INDC is in a process of constant revision, together with a continuous improvement in the monitoring systems of GHG emissions. Therefore, changes may occur and subsequent changes and adjustments may be made.
 
3.2.3.Subjects
 
The contributions described above may be reached, if there are assumptions such as the following:
a) There is a dynamics of capital formation for the country similar to the average observed in the last two decades, a stable growth of the financial sector and a tendency towards macroeconomic stability.
b) No relevant national event harms the allocation of financial resources at the national and international levels and it is not necessary to reorient activities and public policies, subtracting financing to issues prioritized for the country such as education, health and safety.
c) Priority is given to the implementation of strategies, policies and actions on climate change issues defined in the respective framework law and international treaties, agreements and agreements in this area.
d) It increases the competitiveness of the country and with it, the most efficient insertion into the global economy.
e) Consider the potential participation of the country in carbon market mechanisms that are stable.
f) There is access to more efficient and cost-effective technologies that can achieve GHG emission reductions and maintain the corresponding monitoring.
 
3.2.4.Surface and / or period of application
 
The application period is 2016 - 2030, with periodic reviews in accordance with the cycles established in the new agreement, using basic information from the years 1990-2005. This allows the country to improve the metrics and accounting of emissions, as well as a reorientation of lines of action if necessary.
 
3.2.5.Scope of application and coverage
 
Coverage: nationwide. Greenhouse gases: Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH 4 ) and nitrous oxide (N 2 O) (expressed in CO 2 equivalent). Sectors: energy, land use and land use change and forestry, agriculture, waste and industrial processes.
4. ADAPTATION
Guatemala is a country that suffers the effects of climate change that, due to its social and economic characteristics, is considered very vulnerable. The State of Guatemala, through various national instruments, promotes and proposes the transversal reduction of vulnerability and improvement of adaptation processes in key sectors; establishing for this as a priority to strengthen the adaptation processes in:

Human health
Coastal marine areas
Agriculture, livestock and food security
Forest resources, protected areas
Conservation and management of strategic ecosystems
Infrastructure
Integrated management of water resources
Quality of productive infrastructure 
Soil protection
Comprehensive Management of Disaster Risk Reduction.

In compliance with the framework law on climate change, the national adaptation and mitigation action plan for climate change is currently being developed, which must be updated according to the results of future national communications. Based on this Plan, each government institution will prepare its institutional strategic plans to address climate change in accordance with its legal mandate, which implies a strong impact on the national planning process and its link with the general budget of the Nation. .
In terms of disaster risk reduction linked to extreme weather events, the country develops a process of unification of climate information and the development of early warning systems; However, there are still technological, financial and cultural barriers that require greater support to speed up the response capacity of institutions and the population. The framework law on climate change (Article 14) provides for the development of methodological guidelines for risk management, the reduction of vulnerability and the improvement of adaptation capacity.
In the agricultural and food security issue, the crop monitoring system - coordinated between government agencies and private sector programs focused on nutritional food security and international cooperation agencies - prioritizes those actions that have a direct effect on the production of crops. food, mainly for self-consumption and subsistence in priority areas.
The majority of the population is linked to the agricultural sector and there is a need to provide producers with the necessary tools and technology to face the change and climate variability in the sector that promotes good adaptation practices that favor the adjustment of the systems agro productive against the changing climate and its derivations.
In the area of disaster risk reduction linked to extreme weather events, a process of unification of climate information and the development of early warning systems was initiated; However, there are still technological, financial and cultural barriers that require greater support to speed up the response capacity of the population and its institutions.
5. IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISMS
The implementation mechanisms refer to the instruments, institutions, policies, strategies, plans, programs or support projects to achieve the aspiration of the country for the effective reduction of greenhouse gases.
The framework law on climate change created, at the political level, the national climate change council aimed at ensuring the application of that law. Additionally, specialized technical units have been created in the Ministries of Environment, Agriculture, Energy and Mines, Finance, Foreign Affairs and other dependencies such as: National Council of Protected Areas, National Institute of Forestry, Institute of Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology.
The framework law on climate change dictates the national guidelines for the process of planning and programming public investment to integrate the variable of climate change and orders the preparation of the national action plan for adaptation and mitigation, which is under construction. Based on this Plan, the law mandates the development of strategic institutional plans for vulnerability reduction, adaptation and mitigation of climate change linked to national planning and the Nation's budget.
The climate change framework law also created the national information system (Article 9) on climate change that will contain information on mitigation and adaptation issues.
As for the marine-coastal ecosystems, there is a Policy for the Comprehensive Management of the Coastal Zones of Guatemala (Governmental Agreement 328-2009) that already considers the variable of climate change and is consistent with the National Policy on Climate Change.
Among the relevant actions is the implementation of the national biodiversity strategy and its action plan 2012 - 2022, which allows the integration of biological diversity in the adaptation and mitigation to climate change and the valuation of the ancestral knowledge of the peoples indigenous peoples, recognizing the role of peasant and indigenous economic models, culturally relevant in adapting to climate change.
In the subject of risk reduction, the National Policy for Disaster Risk Reduction is promoted, focused on the implementation of lines of action for the fulfillment of the goal established by the National Development Plan (Katún 2032), in which states that 100% of public institutions and local governments apply criteria of resilient cities and municipalities territories
In terms of adaptation and its relation to human health, the country establishes as a priority the compliance and support for the development of the institutional strategic plan of the Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance and the Guatemalan Social Security Institute (IGSS), taking into It has the following topics: vector diseases that can be increased and others related to climate variability and change.
A Development Strategy with Low Emissions is currently being prepared that will consider the financing and technical assistance aspects for the implementation of public policies, strategies and specific programs in all sectors.
Guatemala pursues that the implementation of mitigation and adaptation mechanisms, whenever possible, have the multiple purpose of influencing mitigation, adaptation and reduction of vulnerability to climate change. Next, the main mechanisms are specified, ordered by emission sector as established by the UNFCCC.
 
5.1. MITIGATION
 
EnergyElectric power generation matrix in the country with a focus on increasing the use of renewable sources. Currently, the National Interconnected System (SNI) has electricity generation of 69.72% renewable and it is expected that by 2030, electric generation will be 80% from renewable sources. The Energy Policy 2013-2027 in its axes: 1) Security of electricity supply at competitive prices, 4) Saving and efficient use of energy and 5) Reducing the use of firewood in the country through the National Strategy of Use Efficient and Sustainable Firewood. Law of incentives for the development of renewable energy projects (Decree 52-2003).Technical standard for the connection, operation, control and commercialization of renewable generation (NTGDR) and self-producing users with surplus energy. Transportation subsector: implementation and improvement of the Transmetro system (BRT for its acronym in English) currently in operation in the city of Guatemala. In addition, legislation is impelled to establish a program of tax incentives and subsidies focused on the use of clean energy for public and private transport, including legislation to regulate GHG emissions in the collective and individual public transport (Art. 21). Implementation of the National Energy Plan, stipulated in the Framework Law on Climate Change (Article 18).
Use and Change of Land Use and Forestry:Implementation of the Strategy to Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+): is currently being developed in line with a vision of improvement and integration of public policy instruments in the forestry sector. Implementation of the Climate Change Agendas of the public institutions related to compliance with Art. 20, of the Climate Change Framework Law, mainly with the Implementation of the Biodiversity and Climate Change Strategy. In the country there is a Guatemalan Protected Areas System (SIGAP), which covers 33% of the national territory. Strengthening for the National System of Prevention and Control of Forest Fires (SIPECIF).Continuity of the implementation and enforcement of forest management policy instruments in which highlight: the new Law for the Promotion, Establishment, Recovery, Restoration, Management, Production and Protection of Forests of Guatemala (PROBOSQUE, Decree 02-2015), the Program of Forest Incentives (PINFOR) and Forestry Incentives Program for Holders of Small Land Extensions of Forest or Agroforestry Vocation (PINPEP), National Forest Landscape Restoration Strategy with a goal of 1.2 million hectares, the Forest Industry Link Strategy and Market and the National Strategy to Combat Illegal Logging.
AgricultureThe existence of an Agricultural Policy to strengthen the National System of Rural Extension (SNER), among other programs linked to the Action Plan for the Implementation of the National Policy of Integral Rural Development. The planning of institutional annual operational plans linked to the agricultural sector programmed based on micro-basins. The implementation of the Irrigation Policy with an integrated approach to water resources.
WastesExistence of a Solid Waste Policy (currently under development), by the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN), to consolidate actions in this sector. Implementation of the Regulation of Residual Waters - Gubernativo Agreement 236- 2006-, as an instrument for the treatment of the emissions produced by this sector.
Industrial ProcessesDevelopment and coordination for the involvement of the private sector through actions framed in the Cleaner Production Policy, which is implemented as a tool for competitiveness and environmental management. Existence of an Incentive Program that motivates voluntary activities of reduction or absorption of GHG emissions, (Article 19).
6. FINANCIAL MECHANISMS
The National Climate Change Fund -FONCC-, as an important financial instrument for the implementation of the law (Article 24), together with the National Conservation Fund, FONACON and the National Fund for Disaster Reduction, regulated in the Art. 15 of the Law Decree 109-96; they are instruments to channel national and international resources necessary to prevent and / or face the effects of climate change. By law, all funds must have the contributions determined in the Budget of Income and Expenditures of the State.
Guatemala already has the Designated National Authority (MARN) for the implementation of the Green Climate Fund as the main financial instrument of the UNFCCC.
Guatemala is participating in the Global Finance Initiative for Biodiversity -BIOFIN- and is developing a National Emissions Reduction Program for REDD + that will have a financial mechanism at the national level, for the payment of results for reduction of emissions in forests.
The National Financial Strategy to Combat Desertification and Drought will be adjusted and updated.
Additionally, Guatemala has a series of mechanisms that support the implementation of various policies and laws, among them: the debt-for-nature exchange fund with the United States and the existing forestry incentive programs established by the laws, the PINFOR Forest Incentive Program, and Forest Incentives Program for Holders of Small Land Extensions of Forestry or Agroforestry Vocation, PINPEP.
Recently (September 24, 2015) in another national effort, the Law for the Promotion, Establishment, Recovery, Restoration, Management, Production and Protection of Forests in Guatemala -PROBOSQUES- has been approved.
The Government of Guatemala is currently in the process of implementing with the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany a Debt Exchange for Adaptation to Climate Change in vulnerable areas. It is expected to continue promoting this type of instruments with other developed or emerging countries.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the resources of the State budget are not enough to cover the wide and deep gap in order to address the effects of climate change and to achieve the commitments of the INDC and the goals of the SDGs by 2030, the construction of capacities, the adaptation, the reduction of vulnerability and mitigation. Reason why the country makes a call to the international community so that, fulfilling a common but differentiated responsibility, the country is provided with additional financial resources to the financing for development -ODA-.
Government of Guatemala Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources MARN Guatemala, September 29, 2015.



(1 / CP.20, paragraph 12). ↩

Framework Law to Regulate the Reduction of Vulnerability, Compulsory Adaptation to the Effects of Climate Change and the Mitigation of Greenhouse Gases. ↩

According to the Germanwatch (2015) for several years, Guatemala has remained on the list of the ten most vulnerable countries globally. ↩




