




National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay
Vision Paraguay 2030
National Development Plan
"Paraguay is a competitive country, one of the most efficient food producers in the world, with strong and innovative industries that employ skilled labor, a supplier of products and services with technology, towards a knowledge economy; With social development indexes in the highest range of South America; Connected and open to neighbors and the world; Environmentally and economically sustainable; With high levels of legal and citizen security; With attention to indigenous peoples, a strong role for women; With visionary and trained youths leading the country; With a democratic, supportive, subsidiary, transparent State, and that promotes equality of opportunity. Through a broad alliance between an Open Government, socially responsible private companies, and an active civil society”
Paraguay, is a Mediterranean country with almost seven million inhabitants that had the highest economic growth in all of Latin America in the last 30 years. In recent years the country has been betting to position itself as an attractive place for investments and is developing orderly policies throughout the country. It is a country that has innumerable natural resources and the production of clean energy is one of the most important activities of the country, as well as a growing agricultural development with a production system based almost entirely by conservation agriculture or direct sowing system And a growing cattle ranch with highly profitable markets that require the country to make greater efforts in the production of food for the world.
Paraguay has abundant energy, clean and renewable, which places it as the leading net global exporter of electricity. It shares with Brazil the Itaipú Hydroelectric, which is a world power in the production of this type of energy.
Since 1973, it has a Forestry Law that obliges landowners to keep twenty-five percent of their natural forest area, and in case of not having this minimum percentage, the owner must reforest an area equivalent to five percent of the area. Surface of the property. In addition, in the Chaco Biosphere Reserve, owners must own at least fifty percent of the area with minimal anthropogenic alterations, or in natural conditions, and preferably carry out activities aimed at maintaining Environmental Services.
Paraguay has approximately 18,500,000 hectares of forest (FRA, FAO 2005) representing 45% of the total area of ​​the country, giving us a value of 2.9 hectares of forest per capita.
In the last decade, the country has made important progress in the macroeconomic aspect, with solid results in the fiscal, monetary and with the initiation of important social reforms. With these measures, poverty and extreme poverty were reduced in this 15-year period in line with economic growth.
In order to respond to the economic and social challenges, the Government of Paraguay has developed a National Development Plan (PND) for the period 2014-2030, where our country vision is expressed to 2030. The National Development Plan is organized around three pillars Thematic areas: (i) poverty reduction and social development; (Ii) inclusive economic growth, and Iii) insertion of Paraguay in international markets. It also relies on a medium-term economic framework that provides for sustainable fiscal policies, improvements in tax collection initiatives, greater effectiveness of social protection policies and their targeting, and broader financial inclusion.
The contributions of Paraguay are adjusted to present national circumstances and the long-term objectives set out in the National Development Plan, as well as support in financing and international technological cooperation. Paraguay is a country that has expressed its desire to contribute positive actions to reduce the adverse effects of climate change, and this plan includes strategic aspects related to climate change for both mitigation and adaptation
Within the National Development Plan of Paraguay there are many economic, social and environmental objectives and the ones that are linked to climate change are the following;

Efficient multimodal transport
Effective control of deforestation
Increase revenues from carbon sales
GDP growth of 6.8% per year.
Increase national revenues from the sale of environmental services (credits for carbon sinks).
Increase coverage of forest areas and protected biomass (% of forest cover and% weighted by global biomass).
Increase the consumption of renewable energies by 60% (share in the energy matrix).
Reduce fossil fuel consumption by 20% (share in the energy matrix).
Increased efficiency in agricultural production systems.

The corresponding lines of action will be:

Develop a sustainable energy matrix.
Incorporate technologies for the exploitation of new sources of sustainable energy (including solar, wind, biomass).
Promote the sustainable management of forest ecosystems and promote reforestation activities for protection and income generation and reduction of the process of loss and degradation of native forests.

In this last year, Paraguay has demonstrated its commitments in the climate and environmental aspects since it has presented a National Plan of Forestation and Reforestation, where through a presidential decree the Vice Ministry of Mines and Energy is authorized to establish certification and funding regimes to the National Development Bank of US $ 40,000,000 for the beginning of forest plantations for energy and timber purposes, which will directly affect the lower pressure on native forests for the use of biomass.
Paraguay also published its National Plan for Climate Change - Phase 1 - Mitigation Strategy, which describes the national priorities regarding this line of action, and has focused its efforts on mainstreaming actions related to the mitigation of adverse effects of climate change, in order to articulate strategies for its effective implementation.

Paraguay is a country particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change variability. Adaptation is an essential element to adjust to these climate changes in order to moderate the damage. The scarce information and lack of strategies on how to deal with the impacts of climate change causes environmental, social, health and economic problems; it is therefore necessary to direct action plans towards adaptation, which include the participation of all possible actors.
Based on the common but differentiated responsibilities of each country as mentioned in Article Four of the UNFCCC commitments, where national and regional development priorities are focused according to their national circumstances. And where the same article states that in implementing commitments, the specific needs and concerns of developing country parties arising from the adverse effects of climate change or the impact of the implementation of response measures must be addressed, In particular from some countries "among which they mention landlocked countries".
Therefore, the following pages describe Paraguay's national contributions, which means that our country sets ambitious and fair targets to avoid emissions of 429 MtCO2eq. During the period of implementation of this action plan, and from 2030 to avoid emissions for a total of 83 MtCO2eq. On an annual basis, established according to the projected development calculations in the existing studies.
"This document was prepared, prepared and socialized by the Secretariat of the Environment as an authority to implement Law 251/93" Approving the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change", and is subject to the approval of the Executive Branch . "
NATIONAL CONTRIBUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY



Goal Type
Deviation of emissions from the projected baseline by 2030. "Business as Usual Scenario Deviation"




Global Goal
20% reductions based on projected emissions behavior by 2030.

unconditional target: 10% reduction of projected emissions by 2030
conditional Target: 10% reduction in projected emissions by 2030



Baseline
Reference Point: INGEI base year 2000 presented in the Second National Communication.
Emission projection

INGEI projected base year 2011: 140 Million tons of CO2 equivalent (under review)
INGEI projected base year 2020: 232 Million tons of CO2 equivalent (under review)
INGEI projected base year 2030: 416 Million tons of CO2 equivalent (under review)



Scope
Sectors: all sectors cited in the IPCC methodological guidelines for the realization of greenhouse gas inventories
Gases: All gases cited by the Kyoto Protocol
Coverage: National


Period of Application
2014-2030 (According to the established in the National Development Plan).


Review Periods
Every 5 years. In addition, Paraguay reserves the right to review, update or adjust the proposed contributions as well as the commitments set according to the updates of the national communications. So too according to the new commitments arising from the new global climate agreement.


Methodology

National Development Plan 2014-2030, National Policy on Climate Change, Mitigation Strategy of the National Climate Change Plan Phase I, First National Communication, Second National Communication, National Statistics of the Central Bank of Paraguay, Environmental Statistical Compendium of Paraguay.
Inventory of Effective Gases base year 2000, which was presented in the Second National Communication and carried out with the methodological guidelines of the 1996 IPCC
The global warming potentials (Global Warming Potential) are those cited in the 1996 IPCC Guidelines.



Ambition Level

The level of unconditional ambition is underpinned by the 2014-2030 National Development Plan.
The conditional targets will be considered based on international cooperation and technological exchange, and based on the national priorities identified in the National Development Plan 2014-2030



Adaptation

For Paraguay adaptation is a priority established in the National Development Plan 2014-2030.
The National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change is under construction. The priority sectors identified are:

Water resources
Forests
Agricultural and livestock production
Territorial Ordering
Energy
Infrastructure
Health and sanitation
Risk management and natural disasters Early warning systems




Financing

Paraguay needs to promote the implementation of financial resources necessary to implement climate change adaptation and mitigation plans, programs and projects in the following priority areas:

Food security and sovereignty
Water (provision and sanitation)
Energy
Biodiversity and forests
Health
Clean Industries
Infrastructure
Transportation

Climate finance through the various existing funds (Green Climate Fund, Adaptation Fund, Market and non-market mechanisms, Global Environment Facility, etc.)



Technology Transfer
Paraguay is promoting mechanisms to promote technology transfer in order to promote and facilitate research and analysis of technological measures and solutions applicable to vulnerability and adaptation to the effects of climate change, including those that guarantee poverty reduction, sovereignty and food security.


Means of Implementation
The INDCs of Paraguay include a unconditional and a conditional contribution.

The unconditional contribution assumes unilateral actions.
The conditional contribution assumes national activities to be implemented that will require international cooperation in terms of financing, technology transfer, capacity building.






