





The Republic of Gabon
Planned contribution at national level - Conference of the Parties 21 31 March 2015
Contribution of the Gabonese Republic
In accordance with Decisions 1 / CP.19 and 1 / CP.20 and its Strategic Development Plan, Gabon communicates, through this document, its nationally defined contribution (INDC) to address climate change and all related information. The elements included in the National Contribution of Gabon are the synthesis of Gabon's ambitions and public policies, which, at the moment of making a turn in its development, chooses to commit itself resolutely to a sustainable development, based in particular on Controlled GHG emissions
This submission is doubly important for Gabon, due, on the one hand, to the commitment of the President of the Republic to pursuing a sustainable development policy and, on the other hand, to contributing to the global effort to reduce the rise in temperature.



Type of commitment
Reduction from an uncontrolled development scenario


Perimeter
Total GHG emissions excluding carbon storage in biomass forests


GHG
CO2, CH4, N2O (HFC, PFC, SF6 and NF3 Will be covered later)


Year of Reference
2000


Period
2010-2025 (period of the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan)
These analyzes will be extended to 2030 or even 2050 within the framework of the Further studies to be carried out before COP21


Level of reduction
At least 50% reduction in emissions compared to the Development in 2025


Carbon credits
No reduction from purchases of carbon credits outside Gabon



Cumulatively, Gabon's commitments must reduce GHG emissions by more than 1,500,000 GgCO2 over 2010-2025, ie 65% compared to the trend scenario.

In 2025, the gains are in the order of 62% compared to the trend scenario.

This submission will be supplemented by the Climate Conference of annexes detailing more precisely the scenarios and measures envisaged by Gabon to follow up and fulfill its commitments.
A. The Gabon GHG Profile
Covered 88% by the forest, Gabon, like many forest countries, plays a role of "sink" of carbon by absorbing more than 4 times more CO2 than it emits.

The numerous measures already taken by Gabon (Forest Code in 2001, the creation of 13 national parks covering almost 11% of the territory in 2002, etc.) all contribute to sustaining the role played by the Gabonese forest in the storage of carbon.
Excluding carbon storage in biomass, Gabon's GHG profile is as follows:

B. Philosophy of Commitments in Gabon
Gabon does not wish to limit its Climate policy to the simple conservation of forests, using international financing mechanisms. This logic of rent would be Economic and social development by enslaving it to external mechanisms unrelated to the real economy.
That is why the commitments made by Gabon relate exclusively to its GHG emissions excluding carbon storage by biomass.
Within this restricted perimeter, Gabon's emissions are distributed as follows:

Developing countries and population growth, Gabon cannot commit itself to an absolute reduction in its GHG emissions, but rather to a mastery of these in the context of its development.
The underlying taken into account are:

Population growth of 2.5% per year;
Economic growth (excluding the oil sector) of 10% per year from 2010.

Two scenarios of GHG emissions have therefore been developed:

A "trend" scenario that corresponds to uncontrolled economic development;
A scenario "mastered" taking into account all public policies implemented after 2000 such as the Forest Code, national parks, the national plan to reduce flaring, the strategic planning of industrial development PSGE with low intensity carbon, Climate Plan, the implementation of a market mechanism induced by the Act relating Orientation for Sustainable Development in Gabon and the forthcoming adoption of the National Plan Assignment Lands

C. Change in land use
With more than 60% of direct emissions, land use and its corollary, land-use change, play a crucial role in achieving Gambia's ambitious GHG reduction targets.

The main assumptions underlying the uncontrolled (or trend) development scenario are:
The gradual increase since 1950 in the area of ​​forest licenses from the coast to climax forest formations in the interior of the country will increase; Population growth will lead to increasing food requirements resulting in the development of industrial crops, resulting in an average loss of 175 tonnes of carbon per hectare.

In relation to this development, the controlled development scenario rests on:

The adoption of a Forest Code that grows forest to expand their rotations of 15 to 25 years, with rates of less damage;
The creation of 13 national parks in 2002 which banned logging in vast areas of the territory,
followed in 2012 by restrictions on large areas of the province Estuary;
the adoption of a National Land Use Plan (NAP) to allow optimal allocation of areas to different uses, excluding intact forests, high conservation value forests and particularly high carbon forests .


By taking into account forest-related emissions (which were not included in the national GHG emissions inventory), these measures will reduce GHG emissions by more than 1,500,000 GgCO2 over 2010- 2025, ie 68% compared to the trend scenario (63% in 2025)
D. Petroleum Industry - Flaring
Representing 23% of direct emissions in 2000, emissions associated with the flaring of associated gas in oil production have been the subject of several measures.
These measures include the 2007 accession to the World Bank's Global Gas Flaring Reduction (GGFR) initiative, the promulgation in 2014 of Law No. 011/2014 regulating the hydrocarbon sector in the Gabonese Republic Banning continuous flaring in Gabon and this, consistent with the participation of Gabon this year in the initiative "Zero Torching of Routine by 2030" launched by the GGFR.
These measures already have a very significant impact on GHG emissions.

Over the period 2010-2025, this voluntarist policy will reduce GHG emissions by 17,341 GgCO2, or 41% of emissions (63% in 2025).
The main means of implementing this reduction plan in Gabon, which are the re-injection and the production of electricity, involve investments particularly in compression units. This investment is part of the "oil costs", ie expenses incurred by the operators to which Gabon recognizes a right of recovery on the zone of exploitation as indicated in the Gabonese hydrocarbon code. This is equivalent to a reimbursement of all these costs to operators by Gabon.
E. Energy
Emissions from local burning of fossil fuels represent the third station of emissions

Electricity
The control of GHG emissions related to electricity production and consumption depends mainly on two types of measures:

Increased energy efficiency of the economy;
The development of decarbonized means of production.

A historical analysis of the period 2000-2010 shows that the energy efficiency of the Gabonese economy has improved on average by 3.8% per year.
The Gabon wishes to build on this momentum and continue to improve energy efficiency on this basis, with a target of about 4 000 GWh consumed in 2025.

On this basis, Gabon has developed an ambitious plan for the development of hydroelectricity, with the objective of ensuring by 2025 a supply of electricity based on 80% on hydroelectricity and 20% on gas.

On this basis, this plan will reduce GHG emissions by 9,000 GgCO2 over 2010-2025, ie 31% compared to the trend scenario (48% in 2025)

These production capacities will also make it possible to export about 5,000 GWh over the period 2010-2025.
Finally, Gabon is also developing a solar electrification of remote villages plan. This plan will improve access to energy in rural areas without use of fossil fuels
Petroleum Industry - Fossil Energy Consumption
GHG emissions from energy industries excluding electricity are due to the petroleum industry. These emissions thus follow the oil production curve, as shown in the following graph.

Given the relative low stakes, Gabon has no reduction commitments in this sector.
Transport
Transport emissions accounted for only 2.4% of emissions in 2000 (but 20% of energy emissions). While there has not yet been a complete macroscopic study of this sector, many projects are planned, including infrastructure projects (with many planned routes), development of common transportation (e.g. in Libreville, to combat congestion) or changes in legislation (e.g. the ban on the import of vehicles over 3 years old).
In the absence of additional data, Gabon undertakes to control rising Energy consumption related to transport 80% of the baseline scenario in 2025.

On this basis, Gabon has developed an ambitious plan for development of hydropower, with aims to ensure that by 2025 the supply of electricity based on hydropower 80% and 20% on gas.

Other energy consumption
This section covers the energy consumption (excluding electricity) of industry (excluding petroleum industry), commerce and institutions (including administration), households, agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
Again, no macroscopic study is available but according to the general philosophy of its development, Gabon is committed to contain the growth of these emissions.
In the uncontrolled development scenario, the evolution of GHG emissions follows the evolution of GDP, whereas in the controlled development scenario, the carbon intensity of the GDP decreases by 2% per year.
On this basis, this commitment should reduce GHG emissions by 3 500 GgCO2 by 2015-2025, ie 8% compared to the trend scenario (18% in 2025).
F. Other GHG emissions
Emissions from waste, industrial processes (cement works) and agriculture represent 4th station of programs.

Waste
Gabon undertakes to halve greenhouse gas emissions related to waste processing and water waste in 2025. Taking into account horizon of the expected evolution of the population, this commitment must reduce greenhouse gas emissions over 2000 GgCO2 on 2015-2025, or 16% the trend scenario (50% in 2025).

2. Industrial processes (cement works) and agriculture
In the absence of clarification, these sectors are excluded from this contribution.
G. Adaptation
Gabon's vision for adaptation is based on the integration of this component into a coherent investment framework based on the country's development strategy, rather than individual isolated aid or subsidies unrelated to the strategy.
To this end, Gabon has adopted such a National Adaptation Strategy coastline face effects of climate change. This comes through measures to management integrated coastal area by the establishment of an appropriate legal framework, acquiring tools and finally monitoring the training and information.
Moreover, the general guidelines of the strategy advocated the implementation of a scheme the development of coastal urban areas, promotion of income generating activities linked to marine and coastal ecosystems. To this we must add a device comprising projects conservations of mangroves for coastal protection, species protection, the establishment specific facilities for the reception and waste management, monitoring of nesting marine turtles and the establishment of a coastal observatory and the marine environment
The cities of Libreville and Port-Gentil, which are particularly exposed, are subject to protection measures on the coast by physical barriers and rehabilitation works on the banks. The economic zone of Mandji Island has a surplus.
This strategy enshrines Gabon's commitment to taking action against climate change by taking into account the adaptation of its territory to the effects of these
H. Funding
As indicated in paragraph B "Philosophy of Commitments of Gabon", the country has engaged both sectoral measures or regulations (forest code, creation of national parks, national flaring reduction plan, ban on log exports, etc.). ) As a regulation governing the general functioning of the economy, in application of the Law on the Orientation of Sustainable Development.
In all cases, these measures and regulations have a direct or indirect impact on GHG, as well as other Sustainable Development variables such as biodiversity, ecosystems and social and community capital. In particular, the application of the market mechanism induced by the Sustainable Development Guidelines Act has an incentive, behavioral and financial effect on the overall reduction of GHG emissions on all activities of the country.
Future studies will help quantify the reduction in expected emissions.
How funding for mitigation and adaptation measures
The Act on the orientation of Sustainable Development provides for the establishment of a National Fund Sustainable development. The creation of this fund is under review and will be positioned in the line of National Climate Fund that develop in different countries, taking into account the particularities of the Gabonese strategy. The Fund will channel and stimulate a part of financial flows dedicated to reducing emissions and more broadly to sustainable development: (1) state budget, (2) private investments, (3) credits revenue from the domestic market, (4) donor contributions or loans funds).
In the meantime, the various sectoral provisions or regulations presented in this document are accompanied by a financing strategy tailored to each case or sector, which can be broken down under 4 additional modalities:

Through the state budget,
Through the involvement of the private sector interested in the investment opportunities offered by Gabon's development potential,
The functioning of the measure or regulation, which implies that once it is established, it operates autonomously thanks to the economic interest of the private actors involved (eg, once the initial investments have been made, the reduction of flaring gases Self-financing by electricity revenues),
Through the support of the Cooperation or institutions specialized in Climate Finance or in sectoral technical programs, which wish to set up a partnership with Gabon.

Apart from this mechanism under construction following the promulgation of the Act in August 2014, the Climate Plan in 2013 listed a number of other regulatory provisions that could potentially contribute financially to the reduction of GHG emissions (green certificates, Bonus / malus system etc.). These possibilities may be the subject of further studies, in addition to the actions currently being carried out
The Gabonese domestic market on GHG emissions
The Law on Sustainable Development in Gabon establishes a virtuous mechanism whereby activities that develop must first carry out a review of their impacts (the Sustainable Development Impact Study), carry out a Management Plan in order to control them and reduce them, and compensate for the incompressible negative effects. The mechanism is therefore in line with the logic of measuring, reducing and compensating, which also serves as a guideline for many international carbon market initiatives.
The relationship with the Green Climate Fund
Gabon has registered in January 2015 with the Green Climate Fund and claims to operationalize relationship as soon as possible in order to show results in the area of ​​reducing emissions but also of adapting to the COP 21.
Indeed, Gabon's climate strategy is country specific and at the same time built in coherence with international trends, methodological advances and orientations of climate negotiations and biodiversity. In this context, Gabon takes charge of its own choices and research in parallel to establish partnerships with programs in line with the strategy presented in this document.
The various fields of action to be financed in terms of reducing emissions, in conjunction with the strategic provisions presented in this national contribution, are in particular projects:

renewable energy, in particular hydroelectric energy,
treatment of waste water and other waste,
energy efficiency,
technology transfer,
land use, both in land-use planning and agricultural and forestry projects.

Developments in financing will be specified in the Annexes.
I. Preparation of the document
The drafting of Gabon's contribution was based on a set of strategic documents, including the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan, the National Climate Plan, the sectoral operational plans and the regulatory texts in force.
Moreover, the process put in place for this drafting has involved directly the public and private actors in charge of the implementation of the public policies or their strict application.



SECTORS
ACTORS INVOLVED REFERENCE DOCUMENTS
REFERENCE DOCUMENTS




Energy - Electricity

Ministry of Energy
State Energy and Water Economics Program


PSGE
Operational plan Electricity 2011- 2016
Contribution from the Ministry of Energy
Annual report 2013 SEEG



Hydrocarbons

Ministry of Petroleum
All oil operators in production (Total, Maurel&Prom, CNR I and Vaalco)


PSGE
Operator Flaring Reduction Plan
Law No. 011/2014 regulating the hydrocarbon sector in the Gabonese Republic



Agriculture

The Minister of Agriculture
Seed Program Coordination
Olam Gabon


PSGE
GIS document sites occupied by OLAM



Forest

National Agency of National Parks


PSGE
Sectorial studies and reports - National Land Use Plan
Forest Code



Infrastructures

ANGTI


PSGE
Diagram of Development and
Territory Development
SDNI






