




CONTRIBUTION ESTIMATED AND DETERMINED AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
INDC-Honduras
National Context
Due to its geographic location in the widest part of the Central American isthmus, the Republic of Honduras is permanently exposed to extreme weather events that are being exacerbated by climate change. The biophysical and topographic characteristics of the country, as well as the levels of poverty, confers a high vulnerability to events of this nature. Therefore, in the study for 2015 of the Global Climate Risk Index of German watch, the Republic of Honduras is identified as the country most affected worldwide by extreme weather events in the period 1994-2013.
For the Republic of Honduras, with a percentage of emissions of greenhouse gases less than 0.1% of the world total, the priority undoubtedly is adaptation to climate change. However, as this document demonstrates, the country is also committed to supporting the fight against climate change, under the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, and to contribute to mitigation measures. The Republic of Honduras is also committed to the adoption of a new legally binding agreement applicable to all Parties, and it hopes that under this new legal instrument, the global average temperature increase will be limited to 1.5 ºC.
At the national level, the Climate Change Law, the National Climate Change Strategy and the Agroforestry Law for Rural Development, the latter in the process of approval, articulate the public policy in several fundamental axes aimed at having a low carbon and resistant development. To the effects of climate change that promotes adaptation and brings co-benefits to the population. This vision promotes the transformation of society into a culture of sustainable production and consumption, which manages equity, efficiency, and protection of the environment and natural resources with equity and efficiency, and promotes an adequate adaptation to climate change. This poses a huge challenge given the national circumstances, territorial conditions and environmental characteristics that add up to and overlap with the challenges of climate change.
The Republic of Honduras believes that policies and measures to combat global warming should focus on the "human face" of climate change. To this end, the actions to be taken must improve the living conditions of people who, because of their situation, may be more vulnerable to climate change. These actions should ensure a cross-cutting perspective of human rights and gender equity, ensuring that women, indigenous peoples and Afro-Hondurans have a full and effective participation in decision-making. This message of hope is already included in the policies of the Republic of Honduras within the strategic plan of government "Plan of All for a Better Life".
Finally, it should be noted that the Nationally Estimated and Determined Contribution of the Republic of Honduras has been designed based on national capacities, expected financing conditions and national circumstances.



Mitigation




Type of contribution:
Results-based






Contribution




Type
Emission reduction relative to the baseline of the Business As Usual scenario (BAU)


Contribution

Reduction of 15% of the BAU scenario by 2030 for the set of sectors contained in this BAU scenario. This commitment is conditional on predictable support, and mechanism of climate financing.
In addition, the Republic of Honduras commits, as a sectoral objective, the afforestation/reforestation of 1 million hectares of forest before 2030. Likewise, through the NAMA of efficient stove, the consumption of firewood in families is expected to be reduced by 39%, helping to combat deforestation







Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding




Deadline for Implementation
The implementation period is 2012-2030 with a review every 5 years. The first review will be done after the completion of the third national communication, in order to receive the inputs from it






Alcance y cobertura




Scope of gases included
Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O).


Sectors/sources covered by the contribution
Energy Industrial Processes, Agriculture and Waste


Geographies covered by the contribution
All the national territory






Suposiciones y enfoques metodológicos




Methodology for the accounting of emissions
Quantifiable information from the reference Preliminary estimate of the series of quantified emissions during the Preparation of the INDC (1995-2012 series). Estimates based on the 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, in line with the estimates included in the existing National Communication


Potentials of Heating global
Global Warming potential values (GWP) of the Second IPCC Report for a 100 year atmospheric residence period, in line with estimates included in the existing National Communications
CH4 = 21
N2O = 310


Focus on land use, Land use change and forestry emissions
As a date of submission of this report, it has not been possible to make robust estimates of this sector due to the lack of verified baseline information and the great uncertainty. However, the Republic of Honduras undertakes to provide an estimate of the emissions and sinks of the LULUCF sector within the frame work of the current draft of the Third National communication






Quantifiable information on the reference point




Emissions from natural development of activity (BAU) in Target year
BAU emission projection scenario based on economic growth and historical Emissions trends in the absence of climate change policies. The scenario was constructed in 2015 taking as a starting point the preliminary estimate of the series of quantified emissions during the preparation of the INDC (1995-2012).
This BAU scenario is considered a preliminary estimate that will be updated and improved within the framework of the current project of the third National Communication
The path described by the emissions in this scenario is as follows:

Year 2012: 18.915 Gg de CO2eq
Year 2020: 22.027 Gg de CO2eq
Year 2030: 28.922 Gg de CO2eq



Methodology Of projection of reference
The estimation methodology of the BAU scenario has been based on the Same methodological principles followed for the estimation of historical emissions
The activity variables used are based on economic, population or sectorial projections in the countries






Legitimate and ambitious




The INDC of the Republic of Honduras is realistic, ambitious and equitable; Is based on national progress to date, takes into account the capabilities and circumstances of the country, and seeks to contribute to the objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (established in its article 2).


Legitimacy


Ambition






Planning process




Planning process
List of existing large axes:

Climate Change Law
National Climate Change Strategy
Strategic Plan for Government (2014-2018) "Plan for a Better Life"

Open Processes:

National Climate Finance Process
National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change
Update of the Action Plan of the National Climate Change Strategy
Agroforestry Law for Rural Development

These instruments articulate public policy around strategic axes, where indicators have been established to achieve low carbon development, both economically and socially, seeking to mitigate climate change, as well as effective adaptation to climate change. In addition, specific actions for adaptation and mitigation have been identifies in multisector consultations
The elaboration of this FTI has included a process of participation of the main actors involved, including participatory workshop and sectoral meetings.






Means of implementation




Financing
The Republic of Honduras has initiated the preparation of an Investment Plan on the subject of climate change. Through which, it is sought to mobilize climate financing to achieve the objectives established in the INDC, in addition to those that will be established in the National Adaptation Plan.
This Investment Plan arises from the financing and institutional strengthening needs identified through a diagnosis of the current capacities and limitations in the country to access and manage climate funds. A review of public spending in terms of climate change is also being prepared and will serve as input to the Climate Change Investment Plan. It has also been found that the Republic of Honduras can hardly meet these needs without external support, given the limited resources available to the country


Technology transfer
The Republic of Honduras is currently undertaking a technology needs assessment that will serve as a basis of the creation of the Technological Action Plan


Support for Capacity building
One of the four pillars of the Climate change Directorate of the environment Secretariat is knowledge management. Honduras intends to support the generation of information, knowledge management and periodic monitoring of climate indicators through the newly created Observatory for Sustainable Development and Climate Change. It is sought that the Information system of the INGEI that are elaborated periodically within the National Communications is under this observatory. It is sought that this Observatory includes a major component of strengthening capacity



General Perspective
The Republic of Honduras recognizes the different effects of climate change on different vulnerable groups of people. It also believes that the gender perspective is an essential aspect to be included in a sustainable national development model. Therefore, it recognizes the role of women as an agent of fundamental change, which must be taken into account in decision-making that allows the development of a society low in carbon and resistant to the effects of climate change.
Adaptation
The Republic of Honduras considers adaptation to climate change as a priority to reduce the vulnerability of the country. There are also opportunities to promote mitigation measures and actions that also increase the adaptive capacity of their populations, as well as their natural and productive systems. All this is reflected in the General Law on Climate Change and the National Strategy on Climate Change, which describes actions and plans and actions to protect, conserve and restore marine and terrestrial coastal ecosystems and their biodiversity; Comprehensive risk management and sector vulnerability.
Loss and damage
Due to its geographical location, the Republic of Honduras is permanently exposed to extreme hydro meteorological events. In addition to the above, the biophysical and topographic characteristics of the country, despite deriving from an abundant natural wealth, give it a high vulnerability to events of this nature. This situation is exacerbated by the high levels of degradation to which natural systems are subject, mainly because of poorly planned human interventions and the lack of awareness of the populations around the management of these resources, among other factors.
The devastating impact of Hurricane and Tropical Storm Mitch in October 1998 led to the loss of more than 14,000 lives, more than half a million victims, the loss of 20 years of investments in road and water infrastructure, 3.8 billion (Equivalent to 70% of the GDP of that year) and the fall of the productive apparatus of the country, plunging the Republic of Honduras into a crisis whose sequels persist until the present. Although extreme phenomena such as Mitch and Hurricane Fifi in 1974 are the referents of the physical, environmental, economic and social vulnerability of the country, the high incidence of recurrent phenomena that, year after year, Causing the loss of lives, housing, infrastructure and means of production. These recurring phenomena dramatically affect the development of the country and create eternal circles of "Investment-reconstruction" that constitute a permanent erosion of the state economy and private initiative.
Climate change tends to exacerbate the incidence, magnitude and frequency of extreme hydro meteorological events and their adverse effects, causing greater pressures on existing natural and human systems. Honduras faces the adverse effects of climate change that have manifested themselves in the form of a higher incidence of hurricanes, torrential rains and floods, drought heat waves, rising temperatures, decreased precipitation, water depletion, Land and crops, rising sea levels, and increasing tropical diseases. Likewise, the greater frequency and magnitude of the climatic variability phenomena such as "El Niño" and "La Niña", relevant aspects that are anticipated, will impact more intensely in the coming decades.
It should be noted that in addition to the exposure to which the national territory is subject to the events / phenomena referred to, the low adaptive capacity and high sensitivity of the population, derived from the high percentage of this population that is under the national poverty line, Other factors, contributes to the fact that during the last years the Global Climate Risk Index of the Germanwatch organization places Honduras as one of the countries most affected worldwide by the adverse effects of climate change.
Adaptive Measures
In the Republic of Honduras, adaptation to climate change has gained greater prominence in recent years, opening up space within a country agenda that until very recently had been dominated almost entirely by climate change mitigation and carbon markets. The sectors of the country identified as priorities by the National Climate Change Strategy (ENCC) are:

Water resources
Risk management
Agriculture, Soils and Food Security
Forests and biodiversity
Coastal marine systems
Human health
Infrastructures (especially hydropower)

The Republic of Honduras has made good progress in establishing a favorable regulatory and institutional framework to work towards reducing its vulnerability to climate change, as demonstrated by, inter alia, the National Climate Change Strategy, the Climate Change Law, The National Strategy for Food and Nutrition Security, the National Action Plan to Combat Desertification, Strategies for Adaptation to Climate Change for the Agrifood Sector, Health and Coffee Industry. Currently, a series of strategic climate change planning processes are under way, coordinated by the National Directorate of Climate Change, among which are: National Action Plan on Climate Change, Technological Needs Assessment, Change Investment Plan Climate, National REDD + Strategy and the National Adaptation Plan.
Currently, the National Adaptation Plan is being developed and it is expected that its inputs will provide updated and detailed information on vulnerability, in order to prioritize and focus future adaptation efforts. An advance of this plan is anticipated for the end of 2015, reason why the measures contained within this INDC are partial. However, the final document of the National Adaptation Plan foreseen for 2016 will collect the inputs provided by other climate change strategic planning processes currently in the process of generation, including the INDC.
The agri-food sector in the Republic of Honduras is one of the sectors of greater economic importance and at the same time one of the most vulnerable to climate change. Given the importance of this sector, its adaptation measures have been prioritized. Among those identified in the National Strategy for Climate Change, the following stand out:

Change in agricultural practices: introduction of agroforestry systems "Quesungual"; Reduction of fertilizer load; Use of slow-acting organic fertilizers; Changes in crop calendars; Encouraging the production of Creole seeds adapted to local conditions; Introduction of insect repellent plants into established crops; Modification or elimination of inappropriate agricultural burning practices; Measures to combat erosion; Micro-irrigation programs in slope agriculture; Practices of biological control of pests and diseases; Development of organic fertilization systems; stimulus and / or inductive impulse to organic agricultural production, including fiscal and financial incentives
Changes in livestock practices: changes in pasture time; Sowing of improved pastures; Implementation and diffusion of intensive livestock under housing; and, limitation of the burning of pastures for the control of mites in cattle. 
Capacity building and research: selection and development of varieties and species of crops and pastures resistant to droughts, floods and major; Implementation of the national integrated pest management program; Design and implementation of a national biodiversity research program; Research and development of natural biocides; Promotion of the establishment of regional research centers and a national outreach program; And, development of sustainable systems based on agroecology.
Society and legislation: improvement of land tenure; Diversification of national agricultural production and, in particular, subsistence agriculture; Strengthening of the country's food security policies and strategies; Improvement of the systems of storage, processing and preservation of agricultural production; And, development of model farms for the dissemination of best cultivation practices.

Finally, another sector prioritized for its relevance at the national level is the marine-coastal sector. The Republic of Honduras has a territorial area of ​​112,492 km2 and an Exclusive Economic Marine Zone of 226,955 km2. The Caribbean coast of Honduras, which is part of the Great Marine Ecosystem of the Caribbean, is approximately 650 km long. The Mesoamerican Reef - which extends from Mexico to Belize, Guatemala and Honduras, as well as three groups of islands: The Bay Islands and the Cayos Cochinos Archipelago; The Keys and Banks Miskitos; and the smaller Swan Islands. The Bay Islands group comprised of Roatan, Utila, Guanaja and the Cayos Cochinos has one of the best reefs and is fundamental for the development of the country's tourism. These islands are surrounded by coral reefs that support important fisheries. The northern coast of Roatan enjoys an almost continuous coral reef. In addition to coral reefs, there are other characteristics of the marine-coastal ecosystem that are equally essential to their health and productivity. These include mangroves, wetlands, seagrass beds and sandy beaches. Coastal and marine ecosystems in the Republic of Honduras face threats associated with climate change. Increasing water temperature increases the frequency of coral bleaching events, while sea level rise affects coral photosynthesis by reducing the amount of light coming to them, also causing flooding and retreating at the limit of Mangroves and increased erosion caused by waves. On the other hand, climate change scenarios suggest changes in wind speeds and precipitation volumes, among other factors, favoring conditions that will favor fishing, however, if measures are not taken, this could result in an envelope -Exploitation of the fishing resource, additional to the current one.
Because of the economic importance they represent for the country, as the main source of livelihood for indigenous and Afro-Honduran groups and other coastal communities, and because of their high vulnerability, it is essential to implement strategies that promote / to maintain the integrity and functioning of these ecosystems.


