




REPUBLIC OF HAITI
MINISTER OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Contribution Planned Determined at National Level
September 2015
PREAMBLE
We are pleased to present the Nationally Identified Planned Contribution at the National Level (CPDN) of the Republic of Haiti, which provides relevant information on the proposed effort to address climate hazards. This document sets the orientations on which the actions of the Haitian State will be based during the next fifteen years in order to adapt to climate change and to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by 31% compared to a scenario By 2030. With this effort, Haiti remains one of the world's least emitting GHG countries.
The development of the CPDN is the result of a strong consensus among government, civil society and the private sector on the objectives to be achieved. Many speakers have contributed to the elaboration of this document, which responds adequately to the needs and interests of the Haitian people and is in line with the Strategic Plan for the Development of Haiti (PSDH), the National Action Plan of Adaptation (PANA) and the Second National Communication on Climate Change.
There are many challenges for the Haitian government and people. Haiti must take the necessary measures to both propel its development, adapt to climate change and contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. To do this, we believe it is important to link the fight against global warming to the goal of emerging countries by 2030 set in the PSDH. Thus, our CPDN is articulated around some issues that seem to us priority:

Integrated water and watershed management;
Integrated coastal zone management and infrastructure rehabilitation;
The preservation and strengthening of food security, in particular through the development of the bioeconomy;
Energy transition to reduce dependence on fossil fuels; Information, education and awareness.
Information, education and awareness.

The commitments made in the CPDN represent a global financing requirement of USD 25,387 billion. Haiti therefore expects a real conjunction of the efforts of the international community to continue to support the fight against climate change under the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities" enshrined in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development.
Dominique PIERRE
Minister of the environment
SUMMARY TABLE OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF HAITI



Perimeter
National territory


Base Year
2000


Période de mise en œuvre
2016-2030


Implementation Period
Conditional and unconditional


Sectors taken into account
Mitigation
Energy, AFAT (Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use), Waste.
Adaptation
Agriculture and Food Security, Coastal Areas, Resources
Water, Habitat and Spatial Planning, Health, Education,
Public finances.


Gas concerned
CO2, CH4, N2O.


Unconditional Target
Reduce GHG emissions by 5% compared to the reference


Conditional target
Reduce GHG emissions by 26% compared to the GHG scenario reference


Financing Requirements
USD 25,387 billion (Mitigation: USD 8,773 billion and


For the implementation
Adaptation: 16.614 billion USD)



1. INTRODUCTION
In line with the objectives of its Strategic Development Plan (2012-2030) and in line with national strategies for climate change adaptation and mitigation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the Republic of Haiti communicates its (Small Island Developing State (SIDS) located in the Caribbean region and the only LDC in the Americas, the country is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate disruption exacerbated by the severe degradation of its environment and Its extreme climatic events (cyclones, droughts, floods) constitute a major obstacle to the development efforts of the country, and it follows that Haiti's priority is to adapt to climate change and to respond to losses and damages .
Through this Contribution, Haiti intends to: (i) improve its resilience to disasters linked to climate change; (Ii) to respond to losses and damage caused by extreme weather events; and (iii) to contribute to the worldwide effort to limit the global temperature increase to 2oC.
The country is committed to carbon-free and climate-resilient development, limiting its recurring GDP losses from climate-related disasters, increasing the carbon stock and reducing its carbon footprint. Energy dependence on fossil fuels.
2. METHODOLOGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE HAITI CONTRIBUTION
The elaboration of the Haiti Contribution is the result of a broad consultation process. The participatory approach adopted made it possible to:

To review the main national strategic documents: Strategic Plan for the Development of Haiti (PSDH), National Adaptation Action Plan (NAPA), 1st and 2nd National Communications on Climate Change, Roadmap for a Sustainable Energy System In Haiti, Policy of the Ministry of Agriculture of Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) for watershed management, Strategy of the National Agency for Protected Areas (ANAP), Plan to revive the coffee sector, Haiti Climate Profile, Scaling-up Renewable Energy Program (SREP), Climate Resilience Pilot Program (PPCR);
Consult with stakeholders (sector ministries, civil society, private sector, development agencies, etc.) to define the adaptation priorities of the country and the level of ambition in terms of mitigation and;
Validate the choices made in four (4) regional workshops (north, center, south and adjacent islands).

3. REFERENCE SITUATION FOR GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS IN HAITI
1.1 PROFILE OF THE EMISSIONS OF GES D'HAITI
According to the latest GHG inventory1, Haiti emitted only 7,832 Mt of CO2eq in 2000. The population was 8,578 million and the GDP was 3357.89 million US dollars. The emissions profile by sector and major gases is presented in the figures below.

Between 1995 and 2000, Haitian GHG emissions increased by 20%, a rate of 3.1% per year (see Figure 3). Over this period, population and GDP increased by 1.9% and 4%, respectively.
2
4. HAITI CONTRIBUTION TO MITIGATION
In terms of mitigation, the Republic of Haiti intends to reduce its emissions by 31% compared to the trend development scenario, representing in absolute terms 45.24 Mt CO2 eq. This effort, illustrated in FIG. 4, is distributed as follows:
Unconditional objective:
Reduction of emissions by 5% compared to the baseline scenario by 2030, ie a cumulative 10 MtCO2-CO
Conditional objective:
Emissions reductions of up to 26% compared to the trend development scenario by 2030 Cumulative of 35.24 Mt CO2eq.

Activities related to conditional and unconditional scenarios are presented in the appendix.
1.2 HYPOTHESES AND METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES



Period
2016- 2030


Approach adopted
Mixed approach based on results and actions.


Type of contribution
Reduction of GHG emissions in relation to the trend development scenario through, inter alia, renewable energy and carbon sequestration projects.


Perimeter
Territoire national


Targeted greenhouse gases
Dioxyde de carbone (CO2), méthane (CH4), protoxyde d’azote (N2O)


Covered sectors
Energy

Energy demand (households, industries, sustainable transport and trade)
Energy supply (woodfuel production forest, charcoal production, electricity production)

Agriculture, Forestry and Land-Use Change (AFOLT)

Improvement of grazing by legumes
National Forest Parks
Afforestation and reforestation
Agroforestry

Waste

Municipal solid waste



Business as usual scenario
This scenario takes into account the policies and strategies in place reflected in the Haitian Strategic Development Plan (HSPP) - Haiti emerging 2030.


mitigation scnarios
Mitigation scenarios, both unconditional and conditional, will be implemented through the projects listed in Table 1 in the Annex.


Global warming potential (GWP) 100 years ref. IPCC revised version 96
The values used are those recommended by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) under UNFCCC decision 17 / CP.8 for the preparation of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories.
PRG CO2 = 1
PRG CH4 = 21
PRG N2O = 310


Methodology for estimating emissions
The 2000 GHG inventory was conducted according to the 1996 revised IPCC Guidelines.
The emission scenarios were developed from the Long range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP) software for the energy sector. They rely on the activity data, population projections and the macroeconomic and sectoral prospects foreseen in the strategic plan of development of Haiti (PSDH) - Haiti emerging 2030.
Emissions from the AFAT sector were estimated using the EX-ACT tool, version 4, and waste according to the revised IPCC Guidelines 1996.


Carbon Market
The Republic of Haiti is considering access to carbon markets to finance some of the conditional measures of its contribution.



1.3 EQUITY AND AMBITION
In 2000, GHG emissions in Haiti accounted for only 0.03% of total global emissions. The per capita emissions calculated for the same year were 0.91 TCO2eq. Despite its status as the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) of the American hemisphere and the Small Island Developing State, which is heavily affected by climate-related disasters, the Republic of Haiti firmly believes in the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, A global effort to reduce emissions to achieve the objectives of limiting global warming below 2°C. At the end of this contribution, the country wants to reduce its emissions by 31% compared to the reference scenario. However, given the limited capacity of the country, the achievement of this ambitious objective in relation to its mitigation potential requires the financial, technical and technological support of the international community.
5. ADAPTATION CONTRIBUTION
Haiti, located in the Caribbean Basin, is exposed to many climate-related phenomena. Variations in the rainfall pattern, ed temperature, frequency of tropical storms are among many other climatic signals observed across the country.
The scenarios established in Haiti show an increase in temperature (from 0.80C to 1C) by 203, a decrease in annual rainfall from 6 to 20 per cent, a shift in rainfall seasonality and an increase in the average level Of the sea. By 2014, Haiti has been ranked fourth in the world in terms of vulnerability to the effects of climate change3.
Over the past decade, the country has often been the victim of climate disruptions, mainly due to changes in watershed water systems, increased periods of drought and loss of life due to flooding Tropical storms. The cumulative costs of climate change impacts without taking preventive measures are estimated at US $ 1.8 billion and US $ 77 million through adaptation measures by 20254.
Given the different observed and anticipated impacts, measures have been taken to increase the country's resilience to the impacts of extreme climate-related phenomena. In 2006, Haiti developed its National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) and implemented
A set of activities deriving from NAPA and its Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPRC). Similarly, land-use planning efforts are underway to reduce the vulnerability of the country. However, the measures do not have the scale and intensity needed to respond to the needs arising from the changes under way, particularly in terms of demography and ecosystems.
The various priority actions identified in the National Adaptation Action Plan (NAPA) are not all implemented due to a lack of funding and the weak capacity of public institutions. Difficult access to appropriate financing and technological resources, lack of a regulatory and legislative framework for adaptation to climate change are obstacles to the implementation of planned activities. In this sense, the country needs strengthened technical and institutional capacity and technological and financial support to overcome these barriers
5.2.- PRIORITIES AND ADAPTATION OBJECTIVES
The country's priorities for adaptation to climate change are:

Integrated water and watershed management;
Integrated coastal zone management and infrastructure rehabilitation;
Preserving and strengthening security;
Information, education and awareness.

Under this contribution, Haiti commits itself by 2030 to:

Integrate the effects of climate change into sectoral development strategies;
Develop the 15 strategic watersheds most vulnerable to extreme climate events according to land use patterns;
Protect coastal areas from the impacts of climate change;
Developing bio-economics, climate-friendly and biological agriculture.

6. PLANNING PROCESS
For the implementation of its CPDN,the country intends to define during the period 2016-2020:

Its National Policy on Climate Change;
Its National Adaptation Plan (NAP);
Its Climate Loss and Response Plan;
Its Regional Development Plans by region;
And its National Forest Policy.

Also for this period, the country aims to:

Revise its institutional and legal framework in relation to the objectives of the contribution;
Implement MRV and Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Measures (NAMAs).

7. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
The existing institutional framework for the implementation of actions in the field of climate change is essentially based on the Ministry of the Environment through its climate change management. For the implementation of the CPDN, ​​the head of the Haitian government will assert his leadership on the file and coordination will be ensured by the Ministry of the Environment in direct and continuous collaboration with the National Committee on Climate Change put in place. This committee will be made up of representatives of sectoral ministries, local authorities, civil society and the private sector and will have the mandate to steer, monitor and report on the activities of the Haitian commitment. Gender will be taken into account throughout the CPDN implementation process.
The overall financial envelope for the implementation of the actions foreseen in this contribution is estimated at 25.387 billion USD, of which 16.614 billion USD for the adaptation actions and 8.773 billion USD for the mitigation actions. Conditional and unconditional mitigation measures amount to US $ 7,999 billion and USD 773,519 million, respectively. This will require:

Direct access to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and other funds for conditional mitigation and adaptation activities (Annex 8.2), including the development and implementation of the National Adaptation Plan
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD +) and the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM);
Institutional capacity building;
Technology transfers based on Technology Needs Assessments (TNAs).

The Republic of Haiti calls for the establishment of an emergency fund for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and LDCs to enable them to take post-emergency measures following disasters linked to climate change. It also calls for an international emission-reduction mechanism, such as the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), to be set up under the new climate regimepost 2020, guided by principles of environmental integrity, transparency And absence of double counting. Haiti is in favor of the rapid establishment of such a market in order to mobilize the potential even before 2020
8. ANNEX
8.1. Mitigation measures
Conditional mitigation measures



Sector
Strategic / operational objectives




Energy

Increase the proportion of renewable energies in the Haitian electricity system to 47% by 2030 (hydro 24.5%, wind 9.4%, solar 7.5%, biomass 5.6%).
Install by 2030 (4 wind farms: 50 MW, hydroelectricity: 60MW additional, solar parks: 30 MW, biomass: 20 MW)
Reduce fuelwood consumption by 32% by 2030
Set up well-managed energy forests (10 000 ha by 2030)
Develop and implement transport NAMAs
Promote the use of energy-efficient stoves to replace traditional fireplaces (energy savings of 25-30% per stove).
Improve the energy efficiency of wood-burning furnaces (increase yields from 10-15% to 30-45%).
Disseminate 1,000,000 low-consumption lamps for the replacement of incandescent bulbs.



AFAT

Plant 137,500 ha of forest by 2030, favoring local species, including 100,000 ha conditionally between 2020 and 2030.
Protect and conserve existing national forest parks (10,500 ha) by 2030.
Protect, conserve and expand existing mangrove forests (19,500ha) by 2030.
Restore, upgrade and extend existing agroforestry systems (at least 60,000 additional hectares between 2020 and 2030).
Improve the quality of grazing, particularly of bovine herds, with legumes.
Preserve the country's marine protected areas (MPAs).



Wastes
Define and implement a National Solid Waste Management Policy (Management Plans following Model 5RVE: Source Reduction, Recovery, Reuse, Recycling, Reuse, Recovery and Landfilling).



Mesures d’atténuation inconditionnelles



Sector
Strategic / operational objectives




Energy

To install by 2020, an additional 37.5 MW of hydroelectricity
Control and regulate the import of used vehicles



AFAT

Protect and conserve existing national forest parks (10,500ha) by 2030.
Protect and conserve existing mangrove forests (10 000 ha) by 2030.
Forestry / reforestation: planting of 2500ha of forest per year from 2016 – 2030
Protecting Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in the South Coast of Haiti




8.2 ADAPTATION MEASURES FROM NAPA



Vulnerable sectors / areas
Adaptation needs




Agriculture and Food Security

Crop development and use of appropriate agricultural techniques to climate change.
Conservation of agricultural genetic resources.
Agricultural development
Soil conservation and regeneration.
More efficient techniques for the use of water resources.
Drought-resistant crops adapted to the Haitian context.
Reduced risk of disasters in areas most vulnerable to drought.
Development of crops adapted to salinized water
Rural engineering techniques valorizing local materials and manpower
Development of the thermal energy of the seas for the production of fresh water.
Development of technologies for the conservation, processing and valorization of agricultural products;
Strengthening of meteorological monitoring systems and prediction of agricultural yields.



Coastal zones

Development of a national strategy to adapt coastal zones to the impacts of climate change.
Planning to protect and relocate infrastructure at risk from the impacts of climate change.
Reduced disaster risk in areas most vulnerable to flooding, and integration of migrations (internal and international) and planned relocation of communities as an adaptation strategy.
Establishment of infrastructures resilient to adverse climatic events.
Cost-benefit studies of relocation and planned relocation of communities
Adoption of measures for the protection, conservation and sustainable management of mangrove ecosystems.
Coastal monitoring, sustainable fisheries management.
Improvement of the autonomy and safety of small fishing vessels.
Conservation and protection of marine biodiversity and coral reefs.
Support to community management of marine protected areas.



Water resources

Supplying water to communities through the construction of dams, family tanks, impluviums, hilly lakes
Development of an Atlas of water resources in a geographic information system.
Physical and administrative protection (communal decrees) of water sources.
Improvement of the filling of groundwater by reforestation activities, physical barriers (dry walls) and biodynamic (hedges) in the catchment areas.



Watershed

Restoration of hydro meteorological stations in Haiti's strategic watersheds.
Capacity building for watershed management committees strengthened.
Development of 15 strategic watersheds based on established co-management plans
Reforestation of upstream areas.
Development of payment initiatives for ecosystem services in watersheds.
Regulation of water flow, protection and restoration of soils.



Human settlements

Development and implementation of Urban and Sustainable Development Plans for cities at risk of flooding, including the movement and internal displacement of the population and the reduction of disaster risks in the most vulnerable areas.
Update of the National Risk and Disaster Management Plan (PNGRD) incorporating the risks associated with Climate Change.
Strengthening the National Risk and Disaster Management System
Strengthening of early warning systems for natural disasters.
Development and implementation of local risk and disaster management plans in the most important / vulnerable cities.
Strengthening of construction standards.



Education

Production, communication and dissemination of knowledge related to climate change, including migrations (primary, secondary and universities).
National awareness of the causes and effects of climate change and adaptation strategies.
Strengthening of the Climate Change Department of the Ministry of the Environment.



Public Health

Improved access to drinking water to prevent waterborne diseases.
Improved access to health care.
Establishment of a monitoring system in the peripheries of the drilling areas.
Taking climate change into account in the planning and implementation of health projects at national and local level.



Public finances

Support to the insurance sector for the management of losses resulting from natural and climatic disasters.
Adoption of tax incentive measures favoring renewable energies, local production including bio-economy.
Support to public finances by developing and implementing a financial risk management strategy for disaster / climate risks.
Development and strengthening of financial instruments that increase capacity to mobilize resources following natural disasters and reduce fiscal volatility.
Increase the resilience of public investment by improving the understanding and assessment of the risks posed by climate threats.







2th National Communication on Climate Change (2013)↩
In the Second National Communication of Haiti, the emissions related to the energy sector of 1994, the year of embargo on petroleum products, were approximated from the 1995 data. Therefore, 1994 is not considered in GHG growth analysis↩
Maplecrof Atlas of Climate Change and Environmental Risks↩
Estimating the costs of climate change impacts in Haiti (MDE, 2015)↩




