




NATIONAL CPDN
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
Honor - Fraternity - Justice
Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development
DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION AT NATIONAL LEVEL
FROM MAURITANIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE (UNFCC)
21st Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in Paris, France. September 2015
Summary of the CPDN of Mauritania
Year of reference: 2010.
Commitment period: 2020 - 2030.
Sectors taken into account: Energy, Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use, Industrial Processes and Use of Products and Waste.
Gases involved: CO2, CH4, N2O.
Evaluation methodology: IPCC 2006
Objective of the mitigation contribution: Reduction of GHG emissions in the target year (2030) compared to projected emissions in the same year in the normal course of business scenario.
Target reduction level in 2030: 22.3%.
Cumulative emission reductions for the period 2020-2030: 33.56 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Contribution type: Conditional 88% and Non-Conditional 12%.



Financing Requirements:
$ 17.6 billion, including:


Mitigation:
$ 8,2 billion.


Adaptation:
$ 9,4 billion 



Introduction
Country No Annex 1 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Mauritania belongs to the African Sahel zone most affected by recurrent droughts since 1968. The resulting desertification is all the stronger, The effect of climate, combined with human action, has had direct consequences on an already precarious environment, namely the deterioration of the general socio-economic conditions of the country and of the physical environment. The country's vulnerability to climate change therefore affects all vital sectors of the national economy.
In response to the recurring disasters resulting from this situation, the Government of Mauritania regularly devotes part of its budget to special programs to assist vulnerable populations affected by droughts. This is the case of the Emel (Espoir) program, which is being implemented, for an initial financial allocation of 42 billion MRO in 2012 and a revolving financing of 12 billion MRO per year, ie a cumulative financing of 78 billion MRO for The period 2012 - 2015, about 300 million US dollars, This emergency program comes just after the 2011 Solidarity Emergency Program, which cost nine billion MROs, or about 35 million US dollars.
The '' Nationally Determined Contribution Determined at the National Level '' of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania is based on sectoral development programs and the strategic framework for poverty reduction. Their overall objective is to contribute to sustainable development, which is low carbon and resilient to the impacts of climate change.
In light of the above, this contribution reflects both the political will of the country to participate in the global reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and to meet the adaptation needs of the country, To the extent of its means and capacities
1- Methodological approach
As part of the preparation of the CPDN, ​​the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) proceeded in three stages: a first stage of sensitization / information, a second stage of elaboration of the Contribution and finally a third stage of confirmation. In this process, two components were considered, the political and technical aspects:

For the political part, the message on the stakes and challenges of COP21 and the National Contribution was relayed to all key sectors by the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. This action allowed to define the practical modalities of the preparation of sectoral contributions by teams, each coordinated by a sectoral focal point. The process of developing the CPDN was also to be completed by political validation marked by Government approval.
For the political part, the message on the stakes and challenges of COP21 and the National Contribution was relayed to all key sectors by the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. This action allowed to define the practical modalities of the preparation of sectoral contributions by teams, each coordinated by a sectoral focal point. The process of developing the CPDN was also to be completed by political validation marked by Government approval

1.1 - Methodologies for Mitigation Assessment
For the analysis of mitigation in Mauritania, three models were used in the calculation of the estimates:

The methodologies of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines and the associated software for the Energy, Industrial Processes and Product Use (PIUP) and Waste 'sectors;
The FAO Ex-Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT) for the AFAT sector
The LEAP model for the analysis of the domestic energy sub-sector.

1.2 - Methodologies for assessing adaptation options
Based on the guidelines (Climate and socio-economic scenarios) and support (joint vulnerability and adaptation) of the MEDD multidisciplinary team of experts, the development sectors proposed their respective climate change adaptation portfolios
2 – National Context
2.1 - Basic data on Mauritania



Area 
1,030,000 Km2- 720 Kilometers of coastline (ONS)




Climate
South: Sahelian climate, hot and semi arid.
North: Saharan climate hot and arid to hyper arid (ONM)


Population 
3,537,368 inhabitants (2013) and (3,596,702 inhabitants in 2015), of which (57,1% of the under 20s (EPCV 2014)


Urban population
59%


GDP 
USD 4.5 billion in 2013 (MAED, ADB)


GDP per capita
1272 USD (2013)


GDP growth
5.7% in 2013 (ONS)


Share of agriculture (including livestock) in GDP
17% (MAED)


Emission in 2012
7070.51 Gg Eq-CO2 (RNI)


Per capita emission
2.1 tonnes Eq-CO2 (RNI)


Per capita issue excluding AFAT
0.7 tonnes Eq-CO2(RNI)


Access to electricity
38.8% of households (DEME)


Current electric mix
In 2012 excluding mining operators:

Hydro: 18.30%
ER: 2.6%
Thermal: 79.10%




In 2015 excluding mining operators:

Hydro: 13.80%
ER: 17.40%
Thermal: 68.80%




Sources: MAED, ONS (RGPH 2013), ONM, BAD, DEME et RNI (2014).
2.2 - Climate change in the national context
Mauritania ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 and acceded to the Kyoto Protocol in 1997. At the national level, the National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSSD) by 2015, October 2006 constitutes the reference framework for national policy related to climate issues. Operationally, it is articulated with the Second National Action Plan for Environment and Sustainable Development (NAPE II) covering the period 2012-16. Long before, Mauritania drew up its National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change (NAPA) in 2004. In 2015, Mauritania launched the first preparatory milestones of its National Adaptation Plan with medium and long-term vision.
3 - The Mitigation Component of Mauritania's Contribution
3.1 - Contribution schedule
The period of mitigation activities proposed by the Mauritania Contribution is 2020-2030.
3.2 - Type of contribution
Mauritania chose to formulate its 'Contribution' in terms of reduction compared to the baseline scenario. The estimate was made on the basis of the projects planned for the period 2020-2030.
3.3 - Sectors and gas concerned
The sectors concerned are all sectors emitting GHGs namely: (i) Energy; (Ii); The AFAT; (Iii) Industrial Processes and (iv) Waste. The GHGs concerned are CO2, CH4 and N2O.
3.4 - Targeted Mitigation Level
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania intends to contribute to the Paris Climate Agreement by reducing its GHG emissions in 2030 by 22.3%, equivalent to 4.2 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2 eq), Compared to projected emissions for In the same year according to the business as usual scenario, which evolves from 6.6 Mt CO2 eq in 2010 to 18.84 Mt CO2 eq In 2030. For the period 2020-2030, the cumulative emissions avoided, according to the proposed measured mitigation, are about 33.56Mt eq CO2.



Sectors
Cumulative Mitigation 2020 - 2030 (Gg Eq CO2)




Energy
-12711.1


Industrial Processes and Product Use
-30.5


Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use
-20431.5


Waste
-386.1


Total evaluation period
-33559.3



This contribution will focus on the energy (electricity generation, transport, agriculture, fishing, etc.), Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use (AFAT) sectors, as well as those with low emissions (industrial processes and waste).
3.5 - Shares of the Contribution

12% of this potential emission reduction may be achieved by means of the unrelated contribution of Mauritania. The nature of this unconditional part of the contribution relates mainly to regulation (examples of the Government's measure in 2015 limiting the age of imports of cars to 8 years and the exemption of the bus tax ex-factory for transit), or as priority actions to access basic services to reduce rural poverty (eg rural electrification, equipment of water points with solar pumps, etc.).
88% of the contribution, corresponding to the internationally supported emission reduction portion.


3.6 - Mitigation funding needs
Implementation of the proposed mitigation projects requires capacity, technology, regulatory and institutional frameworks, and financial means. Given its current capacity, only a counterpart of these projects can be provided by Mauritania's own resources.
To achieve its GHG mitigation ambitions in 2030, Mauritania will need an overall financial package of US $ 9.3 billion, of which 88% (equivalent to US $ 8.2 billion) from international support.
In addition to this direct financial support, Mauritania would like to support its funding needs for mitigation through: (i) the NAMA platform, in particular for energy efficiency and renewable energy programs; (Ii) the inclusion of international carbon markets, such as the CDM, in a post-2020 climate agreement that, coupled with an appropriate accounting regime (MRV), could be used to finance low-carbon investments.
4 - Mauritania's Adaptation Contribution
According to the climate scenarios reported in the Third National Communication (2014), Mauritania, should have a strong socio-economic and ecological exposure to the impacts of climate change:
Temperature. An increase of +2.1 ° C in the average annual temperature throughout the country by 2050 and + 4.5 ° by 2100.
Precipitation. A reduction in the annual volume of precipitation from 20% in regions to 70% in Adrar, compared to the current situation, by 2100.
Extreme phenomena. This increase in temperature and decrease in precipitation would be accompanied by an increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme drought and flood events and disturbances in the seasonal distribution of precipitation.
Sea level rise. The coastline, which extends over more than 720 km of coastline, already shows its sensitivity to the phenomenon of sea-level rise in some places (Nouakchott). Built areas of the capital and the smallest precipitation makes drainage and sanitation generally impossible.
4.1 - The impacts of climate change in key sectors
Impacts on water resources will be significant and will result in a general decline in water resources in the order of 10 to 15%, with the following consequences:

The increase in mean sea surface temperature (SST) with a northward rise of the thermal front beyond its usual geographic boundary and oxygen depletion creates more and more OMZs which could be the source of migration of pelagic species to areas rich in oxygen;
The increase in water temperature and the acidification of the oceans over the last years seem to be accompanied by a multiplication of jellyfish and a recurrent phenomenon of colored waters;
Rising ocean levels and coastal erosion threatening the coastal infrastructure dedicated to fishing;
Increased frequency of storms that reduces fishing productivity.
A dysregulation of the wadis regime and a reduction in the filling capacity of dams due to concentrated precipitation and the accelerated siltation of dams by water erosion in heavily denuded watersheds and,
A warming of the less aerated surface waters at lower flow rates and thus a reduction in their powers of dilution and biodegradation of certain pollutants, etc.

The impacts on livestock will result in a worsening of the current situation, marked by the degradation of livestock productivity. This change in livestock productivity is induced by recurrent droughts, scarcity and distance from pastoral areas and water points. This situation is the result of global warming and abnormal biomass withdrawals that significantly affect the already very fragile level of food insecurity. The convergence of these different factors affects the way in which herds are managed, with in particular the development of peri-urban farming and the implementation of breed improvement programs.
Impacts on habitat, urban planning and spatial planning concern the risks of intrusion of marine waters and flooding of coastal infrastructures and cities, including Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, respectively political and economic capitals. Indeed, coastal areas in Mauritania are home to more than 30% of the country's population, most industries, most import-export activities, major port and airport infrastructure, Extraction of hydrocarbons, almost all fishing activities, but also the two major national parks of the country. With rising sea levels on the one hand, and coastal topography, on the other hand, coastal areas are significantly vulnerable to the risks of marine incursions and floods and Extreme climatic events. To this end, climatic disasters affecting the coastal zone will affect the economic growth of Mauritania, a country where the coastline represents both a singular ecosystem and the main pole of economic development. On the other hand, the risk of silting up towns and villages, combined with droughts, leads to the concentration of populations around wetlands, the fragmentation of human settlements along the roads and the big cities
Impacts on natural resources. The regression of vegetation cover (woody and herbaceous), under the combined effect of chronic droughts and anthropogenic pressure, has accentuated desertification and has been the main cause of the disappearance of forest and biological species and the reduction of Pastoral potential, thus causing a massive rural exodus to the large urban centers. Despite irrational exploitation of forest resources by populations to meet their domestic energy needs (firewood and charcoal) and non-wood forest products (aerial pasture, pharmacopoeia, picking products and cosmetics), forest ecosystems Developed adaptation mechanisms that are today destabilized by climate change.
The most visible form of these manifestations in Mauritania is desertification and its corollaries impacts on fishing. The fisheries sector, like other sectors, is affected by climate change. The perception of these effects is achieved by monitoring the physicochemical parameters of ocean waters and marine biodiversity. This includes:

The increase in mean sea surface temperature (SST) with a northward rise of the thermal front beyond its usual geographic boundary and oxygen depletion creates more and more OMZs Which could be the source of migration of pelagic species to areas rich in oxygen;
The increase in water temperature and the acidification of the oceans over the last years seem to be accompanied by a multiplication of jellyfish and a recurrent phenomenon of colored waters;
Rising ocean levels and coastal erosion threatening the coastal infrastructure dedicated to fishing;

The increase in the frequency of storms which reduces fishing productivity. The inland fisheries sub-sector (Senegal River) faces certain climatic and other constraints: (i) Lower production, (Iii) pollution problems (pesticides) in the Senegal River, (iv) anthropogenic effects (dam), (v) silting of ponds and bodies of water, (vi) difficulties in accessing To the resource due to invasive plants, (vii) irregularity of the river regime due to dams, (viii) conflicts between indigenous and non-indigenous populations
Health impacts. Mauritania is characterized by a worrying nutritional situation, aggravated by a hostile environment, leading to an increase in the prevalence of nutritional pathologies, leading to the emergence of infectious and parasitic diseases, in particular diarrhea and acute respiratory infections, in children under 5 years of age. Infant mortality is dominated by acute respiratory infections (21.5%), malaria (15%) and diarrheal diseases (13.5%) according to the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). These three conditions alone 50% of the under-five mortality causes; 35% of children over five years old. In addition, 32% of children under the age of five suffer from chronic malnutrition and underweight, of which 17% and 10% respectively are severe. This highlights the persistence of a disturbing nutritional situation aggravated by the episodes of drought.
4.2 - Climate expenditure in adaptation
The efforts of the State. The Mauritanian state has been providing enormous resources to curb the impacts of droughts since the 1970s. These have been greatly strengthened since 2010 in the form of a regular funding mechanism for adaptation to climate change . . .
In the field of nature protection, over 20 projects and programs for the protection and restoration of nature were implemented between 1975 and 2008, relayed since 2010 by ambitious programs of adaptation to climate change. These are mainly initiatives to combat silting, reforestation, management and protection of natural resources and biodiversity conservation. The aggregate cost is estimated at approximately US $ 100 million.
In the agro-pastoral sector, considerable efforts have been made to improve the resilience of farmers and ranchers to the impacts of climate change in the form of irrigation schemes, agricultural campaign support (agricultural marketing and climate insurance) ), Improvement of local breeds, promotion of family poultry farming. For example, the 2006-2010 PRSP Implementation Review shows an average annual investment of US $ 65 million.
In the field of fisheries, adaptation measures were implemented as part of the 'Sustainable Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector Management Strategy' (2008-2012, extended to 2014). These actions include:

Protection of habitats in the euphotic zone (depth of 20m);
Development of management plans for major marine fisheries and the Continental Fisheries Development Plan (2010-2014);
Development of a strategic framework for the development of aquaculture (2010-2014).
The strengthening of the capacities and capacities of the ocean control institutions (Mauritanian Coast Guard) and research institutes (Mauritanian Oceanographic and Fisheries Research Institution)

In the area of housing, urban planning and land-use planning, the State has, since 2009, carried out operations of regrouping and resettling atomized villages and hamlets affected by droughts in serviced sites . This type of intervention also concerned cities where the construction of housing and the restructuring of precarious neighborhoods have mobilized significant amounts. The programs financed for the benefit of vulnerable segments of the population concerned: (i) the regrouping of 7 localities To 4,500 Billion MROs, (ii) the creation of two modern cities at 0.445 Billion MROs; (Iii) the restructuring of the precarious districts of Nouakchott (146,000 lots) to 5.6 billion MROs; And (iv) the construction of low-cost social housing units at 7.3 billion MRO. (A total of MRO 17.845 billion equivalent to US $ 64 million.
4.3 - Adaptation ambitions and needs
4.3.1 - The agenda of Mauritania's ambitions for adaptation to 2030
The initiatives proposed by the various sectors aim to reduce the vulnerability of natural and socio-economic systems and thus to cope with climate change. In order to do so, Mauritania seeks the support of its international partners for the achievement of its adaptation priorities, which include:

A food requirement ratio of 117% for rice, 80% for wheat, 75% for traditional cereals; 160% for milk, 126% for white meat;
The realization of the sanitation networks (sewage and rainwater) of the cities of Nouakchott, Rosso, Kaedi, Kiffa, Nouadhibou, Nema, Aioun, Timbedra, Akjoujt, Atar;
An aerial seeding of degraded lands (10 000 ha / year) to promote the regeneration of the natural environment;
Restoration of natural pastures (defensive management and range management) within the framework of territorial climate plans;
The realization of 300 drill holes (of which 150 at depths greater than 200 m) for the exploration of aquifers, which can be transformed into exploitation boreholes and / or piezometers;
The realization of hydrogeological syntheses and resource assessment water in difficult or vulnerable areas and the extension of regular monitoring to all of the captured fields with the tele transmission system
The implementation of the drinking water supply project (AEP) in 4 wilayas of the northern part of the country
The implementation of desalination projects for coastal and other areas,
The construction of 2,000 small isolated water supply systems (AEP) in rural areas equipped with solar power
The protection of the towns of Nouakchott and Nouadhibou against the risks of marine immersion and silting,
Strengthening the resilience of the vulnerable population, particularly in rural areas, in the face of the effects of climate change,
The strengthening of the institutional and technical capacities of national and local structures in the planning, financing and implementation of adaptation measures to climate change,
Strengthening the resilience of natural ecosystems to the effects of climate change,
The integrated and sustainable rehabilitation and management of wetlands against the effects of climate change,
The management of small water bodies on pilot sites,
The promotion of responsible fishing on Lake Foum Gleita,
Capacity building for monitoring and management of inland fisheries,
The promotion of fish farming to improve food security and reduce poverty in rural areas.
Strengthening the nutrition and health of vulnerable households.

4.3.2 - Means of implementing adaptation measures
In addition to capacity-building needs, technological and institutional transfers, the implementation of projects and adaptation measures requires financing over the two periods of 2015-2020 and 2020-2030 of 9,377.4 billion USD:



Sectors
Financial requirements (in millions of US dollars)




Agriculture
843.00


Water and sanitation
1500.00


Breeding
36.40


Habitat, urban planning and spatial planning
5000.00


Environment and Sustainable Development (Nature Protection)
133.00


Fishing and maritime economy
1644.00


Health
221.00


Subtotal Adaptation
9377.40



5 - Implementation and follow-up of INDC
5.1 - Monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV)
In Mauritania, the use of the Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) approach is unknown and has not been previously applied to mitigation measures. In order to ensure greater transparency, accuracy and comparability of information on mitigation measures, the State has already begun the process of developing a system MRV is appropriate and effective for all sectors of the national economy.
Implementation of this system will:

Measure and monitor GHG emission reductions and carbon sequestration generated by the implementation of proposed mitigation measures;
Facilitate the identification and evaluation of objectively verifiable monitoring indicators in order to measure progress against targets;
Promote the reporting and reporting of GHG emission reductions and the benefits of proposed mitigation measures in a transparent manner; and
Allow verification, possibly by an independent third party, and the reliability of the results obtained through the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures.

5.2 - Institutional Framework for Implementation and Monitoring - Evaluation
At the request of the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD), each Ministry has appointed a Sector Focal Point (PFS) in charge of the topic of climate change for its sector. Mauritania has therefore developed a network of Sectoral Focal Points on climate change within the ministerial departments to improve the implementation of the objectives of the Convention and systematically introduce climate change concerns in all sectoral activities. Similarly, Mauritania has set up a monitoring-evaluation system of the national environmental action plan (SE-PANE), which will be expanded to include Mauritania's Contribution Through capacity building of the monitoring and evaluation structures of all relevant Departments.
6 - Equity and ambition
Mauritania is part of both non-Annex I and LDCs affected by desertification; It is a member of the negotiating groups Climate: '' G77 and China '', '' group of Arab countries '', '' African group '' and '' group of Sahelian countries ''. That is why it shares the concerns and positions of all these groups, who see adaptation as a priority and are working to make the Paris Conference a successful Conference of the Parties. Mauritania's GHG emissions are negligible compared to global emissions (0.00015 or 0.015%) and therefore considers it fair that it can continue its development to make its economy and populations resilient to the impacts of change Climate change.
Nevertheless, Mauritania is committed to fully participate in the effort of the international community to reduce its GHG emissions by 22.3% in 2030 compared to the projected emissions in the same year, according to the baseline scenario business). With emissions of the order of 2 tons CO2 eq per capita, the Mauritania Contribution is fair and ambitious.
Implementation of this Contribution would result in a cumulative emission reduction of 33.56 Mt CO2 eq. from 2020 to 2030 at a total estimated cost of $ 9.3 billion
Of this contribution, 88% is conditional for cumulative emission reductions of 29.53 Mt CO 2 eq and a cost of 8.2 billion US dollars. Mauritania aims to strengthen its climate monitoring system in order to better organize the mitigation effort expected of each sector of its development, to pursue its renewable energy development program, to enhance its reserves of liquefied petroleum gas) Via the electricity generation shared with Mali and Senegal.
Mauritania is considering updating its contribution to take account of the evolution of its development.


